1

Introduction

1.1

Context: Multi-Agent Systems in Open-World Environments

The ability to model, simulate, and optimize the behavior of multiple interacting entities is a key
part of modern artificial intelligence. Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) provides a
mathematical framework for training decentralized agents to maximize a shared or competitive
utility. As the field has matured, researchers have increasingly utilized Massively Multiplayer
Online Role-Playing Games (MMORPGs) and open-world environments, such as Neural MMO
and Minecraft, as microcosms for real-world complexity. These environments require agents to
navigate vast state spaces, manage resources, and engage in high-level strategic coordination.
To solve these tasks, the Centralized Training with Decentralized Execution (CTDE) paradigm
has emerged as the standard architecture. Under this paradigm, algorithms such as Multi-Agent
Proximal Policy Optimization (MAPPO) have shown strong results in cooperative settings. By
utilizing a centralized critic that has access to the global state during training, agents can learn
robust decentralized execution policies that rely solely on local observations.

1.2

The Exploration Bottleneck in Sparse-Reward Worlds

Despite the success of algorithms like MAPPO, pure deep reinforcement learning struggles
catastrophically in environments characterized by long-horizon, sparse-reward structures. In
complex RPG-style environments, progress is often gated behind strict dependency graphs (e.g.,
agents must jointly collect wood and stone, navigate to a workbench, craft a pickaxe, and then
coordinate to mine iron).
Traditional RL agents rely on random exploration to discover these initial reward signals. However,
as the depth of the dependency chain increases, the probability of agents randomly executing
the exact sequence of required motor commands approaches zero. While engineers traditionally
attempt to solve this via dense, hand-crafted reward shaping, this introduces significant risks.
Poorly designed shaping signals frequently lead to reward hacking, where agents optimize for
surrogate metrics without achieving the true environmental milestone (Ma et al., 2024). At the
same time, as multiple agents update their policies simultaneously, the environment becomes
highly non-stationary from the perspective of any individual agent, leading to variance spikes and
policy collapse (Lowe_Wu_Tamar_Harb_Abbeel_Mordatch_2017). The fundamental problem
lies in bridging the gap between high-level semantic planning (knowing what to do) and low-level
kinetic control (learning how to do it) without destabilizing the multi-agent learning process.
To systematically investigate this intersection of large language models and multi-agent reinforcement learning, this thesis poses the following three central research questions:
RQ1: How can the zero-shot reasoning of Large Language Models dynamically shape potentialbased rewards, and does this continuous shaping effectively mitigate exploration bottlenecks in sparse-reward MARL environments?
RQ2: Does a Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (HRL) architecture, where the LLM acts as a
discrete Meta-Controller, outperform continuous reward shaping in both sample efficiency

and agent coordination for long-horizon tasks?
RQ3: What vulnerabilities arise from semantic over-confidence in neuro-symbolic MARL architectures, and how can mathematical constraints like Kullback-Leibler (DKL ) divergence
guardrails stabilize execution policies against non-stationary objective shifts?

1.3

Proposed Approach: Neuro-Symbolic MARL

To resolve this exploration bottleneck, this thesis proposes and evaluates two neuro-symbolic
MARL architectures. We treat the learning process as a dual-tier problem, introducing Large
Language Models (LLMs) as high-level semantic reasoners coupled with low-level MAPPO
execution policies (Yu et al., 2022). This approach leverages the pre-trained world knowledge of
LLMs to synergize reasoning and acting (Yao et al., 2023), bypassing the need for the agents to
discover basic logical dependencies via trial-and-error.
Specifically, the subject is addressed through two implementations. The first implementation,
termed the Mixing Board, relies on dynamic reward shaping. Here, the LLM acts as a strategic
meta-supervisor that observes aggregate training statistics to dynamically adjust priority weights
over subtasks. These weights govern a continuous Potential-Based Reward Shaping (PBRS)
signal (Ng et al., 1999), which guides the MAPPO agents toward critical bottlenecks while
theoretically preserving the optimal policy. The second implementation, the Meta-Controller,
transitions to a discrete hierarchical reinforcement learning architecture. Building upon the
Options framework (Sutton; Precup, et al., 1999) and hierarchical meta-controllers (Kulkarni
et al., 2016), the LLM completely replaces the traditional symbolic planner by issuing temporally
extended macro-actions directly to the agents. By augmenting the agents’ observation space
with one-hot option encodings and enforcing strict Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence guardrails,
this approach allows the agents to master the complete dependency graph and adapt to zeroshot semantic shifts in the environment. Through both architectures, this work demonstrates
how the zero-shot planning capabilities of quantized, self-hosted language models (QLoRA)
(Dettmers; Pagnoni, et al., 2023) can be integrated into deep reinforcement learning pipelines to
solve complex cooperative tasks.

2

The Kinetic Baseline: Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

This chapter establishes the theoretical foundations required to contextualize the neuro-symbolic
multi-agent architectures presented in this thesis. We begin by formalizing single-agent Markovian decision processes and policy optimization. We then extend these concepts to multi-agent
environments under partial observability, detailing the Centralized Training with Decentralized
Execution (CTDE) paradigm and Multi-Agent Proximal Policy Optimization (MAPPO). Finally, we
examine temporal abstraction frameworks, specifically Potential-Based Reward Shaping (PBRS)
and the Options framework, before reviewing modern integrations of Large Language Models
(LLMs) as cognitive controllers.

2.1

Fundamentals of Reinforcement Learning

Reinforcement learning (RL) formalizes sequential decision-making under uncertainty, where
an autonomous agent learns to optimize its behavior through interaction with a dynamic
environment(Sutton_Barto_2018). Imagine an agent dropped into a complex grid-world, tasked
with navigating a forest to collect wood. At each step, it observes its surroundings, chooses a
direction, and receives a numerical reward if it successfully harvests the resource.

2.1.1

Markov Decision Processes (MDPs)

A fully observable single-agent control problem is mathematically formalized as a Markov
Decision Process (MDP) (Szepesvári, 2011). Conceptually, an MDP provides a structured
framework for modeling decision-making in environments where outcomes are partly random
and partly under the control of the agent.
Figure 1 illustrates this foundational interaction loop. At each discrete timestep, the agent
observes the current state of the world, consults its internal strategy (the policy π) to select an
action, and executes it. The environment then computes the consequences, responding with the
subsequent state and a scalar reward signal.
Figure 1: The standard Reinforcement Learning interaction loop modeling an MDP.
Agent
Internal Strategy:
Policy π(a | s)

Next State St+1
Reward Rt+1

Action At

Environment

To solve this grid-world mathematically, the system relies on the Markov Property. This property

asserts a very simple rule: the future depends strictly on the present, not the past. If the agent
knows its current state (where it is right now), memorizing the entire path it took to get there
provides no additional advantage. Formally, the transition to the next state is independent of
historical trajectories:
P[St+1 = s′ | St = st , At = at , St−1 = st−1 , . . . ] = P[St+1 = s′ | St = s, At = a]

(1)

Building on this property, the MDP is formally defined by the 5-tuple ⟨S, A, P, R, γ⟩ (Szepesvári,
2011). We can map each of these mathematical variables directly to our wood-collecting agent:
• S is the set of all valid states. In our example, a state s includes the agent’s (x, y)
coordinates on the grid and whether its inventory currently contains wood.
• A is the set of available actions. For our agent, this might be limited to {Move North, Move
South, Interact/Chop}.
• P : S × A × S → [0, 1] is the transition probability. If the agent chooses the ’Move North’
action, P defines the chance it actually lands on the tile above (e.g., 100%, or perhaps
90% if the environment includes slippery terrain).
• R : S × A → R is the reward function. This is the environment’s feedback, such as emitting
+1.0 for successfully chopping the wood, or −0.01 for wasting a step.
• γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount factor. This is a mathematical trick (e.g., 0.99) that makes
immediate rewards slightly more valuable than future rewards, forcing the agent to collect
the wood efficiently rather than wandering the grid forever.
To navigate this world, the agent needs a strategy, known as a policy. Rather than a rigid set of
if/then rules, modern RL utilizes a stochastic (probabilistic) policy, denoted mathematically as
π(a | s) = P[At = a | St = s] (Sutton_Barto_2018). Intuitively, this means that given a specific
state s, the policy outputs a probability distribution over all possible actions. For instance, if the
agent is standing directly next to a tree, its policy π might assign a 95% probability to the ’Chop’
action, and a 5% probability to ’Move South’ to encourage a slight amount of random exploration.
The ultimate goal of the agent is to optimize this policy to maximize its expected discounted
P
k
return, denoted as Gt (Sutton_Barto_2018). Gt = ∞
k=0 γ Rt+k+1 represents the agent’s "total
lifetime score." It is the sum of every reward the agent expects to collect from the current moment
t until the end of the episode, with future rewards multiplied by the discount factor γ so they
carry slightly less weight than immediate victories.

2.1.2

The Actor-Critic Architecture: Two Neural Networks

To train our wood-collecting agent, we must optimize its policy. Instead of memorizing a rigid
table of every possible grid coordinate, modern reinforcement learning parameterizes the policy
using a neural network. This network, commonly referred to as the Actor, is denoted as πθ (a | s).
It outputs a probability distribution over available actions a given the current state s, utilizing its
trainable weights θ ∈ Rd (Sutton_Barto_2018).
To help the Actor learn, we introduce a second neural network called the Critic, parameterized
by an entirely separate set of weights ϕ. The Critic learns the Value function, Vϕ (s), which is its
estimate of the total expected return from a given state. Conceptually, this is the agent’s "gut

feeling" about a location. If the agent stands next to a forest, the Critic outputs a high value; if it
stands next to a hazard, it outputs a low value.
Because we have two distinct networks, they have two distinct mathematical objectives during
optimization:
• The Actor aims to maximize its expected performance score, denoted as J(θ). Therefore,
it updates its weights θ via gradient ascent (∇θ ). Shown later in ??.
• The Critic aims to minimize its prediction errors. Its objective is a loss function L(ϕ),
typically defined as the Mean Squared Error between its predicted value and the actual
target return R̂t . Therefore, it updates its weights ϕ via gradient descent (∇ϕ ):
L(ϕ) = Êt

 
1

2

Vϕ (st ) − R̂t

2 

(2)

As illustrated in Figure 3, this dual-network architecture creates a continuous feedback loop. The
Critic evaluates the Actor’s choice by generating an Advantage signal (Ât ), which dictates the
direction of the Actor’s policy gradient update, pushing it to favor successful actions in the future.
Figure 2: The Actor-Critic architecture. The Actor maximizes its performance via gradient ascent,
while the Critic minimizes its prediction error via gradient descent.
Gradient Ascent
∇θ J(θ)

Actor
πθ (a | s)

Environment
State
St

Sampled Action
At ∼ π θ

Advantage
Ât

Critic
Vϕ (s)

Gradient Descent
∇ϕ L(ϕ)

2.1.3

The Critic’s Evaluation: TD-Error and Advantage

Because the Critic’s Value function is a prediction, it requires a mathematical mechanism to
measure when it is wrong. This is achieved via the Temporal Difference Error (TD-Error),
denoted as δt (Sutton_Barto_2018).
Let’s consider our lumberjack agent. Suppose the Critic predicts that from its current state st , it
expects to gather 50 future points (Vϕ (st ) = 50). The agent then executes an action, immediately
receives a small reward of 5 from the environment (rt = 5), and lands in a new state st+1 . The
Critic evaluates this new state and predicts 45 future points (Vϕ (st+1 ) = 45).
The total updated estimate is the immediate reward plus the discounted future prediction:

rt + γVϕ (st+1 ). If we assume γ = 1 for simplicity, the new estimate is 5 + 45 = 50. Because the
new estimate perfectly matches the old prediction (50 = 50), the TD-Error is exactly 0. The Critic
was perfectly accurate.
However, if the agent unexpectedly finds a hidden cache of wood and receives an immediate
reward of 20, the new estimate becomes 20 + 45 = 65. The TD-Error is the gap between reality
and expectation: δt = 65 − 50 = +15. This positive "surprise" signal forces the Critic to update
its weights ϕ to make better predictions in the future. We can visualize this mismatch in Figure 2.
Formally, the TD-Error is defined as:
δt = rt + γVϕ (st+1 ) − Vϕ (st )

(3)

Figure 3: Visualizing the Temporal Difference (TD) Error as the mathematical gap between the
Critic’s prior prediction and the newly observed reality.

Reward
rt

Old Prediction
Vϕ (st )

TD-Error δt
(Surprise Gap)

Future Value
γVϕ (st+1 )

Building upon this, we must evaluate the specific action the Actor chose. We define the statevalue V πθ (s) as the baseline expectation of simply being in a state. Conversely, we define
the action-value Qπθ (s, a) as the expected return of taking a specific action in that state before
resuming the regular policy.
The Advantage function, Aπθ (s, a), isolates the unique benefit of that specific action by subtracting the baseline from the action-value: Aπθ (s, a) = Qπθ (s, a) − V πθ (s) (Sutton_Barto_2018).
Modern algorithms estimate this Advantage using a discounted sum of the TD-Errors we just
calculated.

2.1.4

The Actor’s Update and Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO)

With the Advantage calculated by the Critic (Figure 3), the Actor knows whether its chosen action was better or worse than expected. Classically, by the Policy Gradient Theorem (Sutton_Barto_2018), the Actor updates its weights θ to maximize its performance via the
following gradient:
∇θ J(θ) = Es∼ρπθ ,a∼πθ [∇θ log πθ (a | s)Aπθ (s, a)]
(4)
In other words, we take the expectation (essentially, an average) of the product of the log
probability of the specific action that was just taken and the Advantage signal from the Critic,
calculated over a large batch of state s the agent visited and action a it took. In plain English,

Equation ?? tells the neural network: "On average across all your recent experiences, if an
action was surprisingly good (positive Advantage), push your weights in a direction that makes
that action more likely in the future. If it was bad, make it less likely."
We can see why it could be fragile in practice. Suppose our lumberjack agent accidentally
executes a random sequence of movements and luckily discovers a massive, hidden cache of
wood. The Critic will calculate an enormous positive Advantage. Standard gradient ascent will
blindly follow the math, reacting by violently dragging the Actor’s weights in that specific direction
to favor that exact sequence again.
This aggressive update frequently causes the network to "fall off a cliff." By violently altering its
internal structure for one lucky event, the agent effectively destroys its own brain, catastrophically
forgetting fundamental survival rules it had previously learned (such as avoiding hazards or map
boundaries).
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) resolves this fragility. It abandons the classical gradient
calculation and instead enforces a strict mathematical guardrail, establishing a clipped surrogate
objective specifically for the Actor, denoted as LCLIP (θ) (Schulman et al., 2017):
h



LCLIP (θ) = Êt min rt (θ)Ât , clip rt (θ), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ Ât


i

(5)

To fully understand this equation, we can break down its notation:
• Êt means we are averaging over a finite batch of real data collected at time steps t, rather
than computing a perfect theoretical expectation. Ât is the estimated Advantage provided
by the Critic.
t)
, which measures how much more (or
• rt (θ) is the probability ratio, defined as ππθ θ (a(at |s
|s
t
t)
old
less) likely the agent is to take the action now compared to before the update.
• ϵ acts as a hard boundary or a speed limit for the updates (typically 0.2, as established by
Schulman et al. (2017)).
If an action yields a massive positive Advantage, the network will naturally try to increase the
ratio rt (θ) exponentially. However, the clip function truncates this ratio at 1 + ϵ (i.e., 1.2). The
min operator then forces the optimizer to use this truncated version, completely ignoring any
further gradient once the probability of that action has increased by 20%. By mathematically
ignoring overly enthusiastic updates, PPO ensures the Actor learns smoothly and stably without
destructive variance spikes.

2.1.5

Kullback-Leibler (KL) Divergence and Early Stopping

While the clipping mechanism described in Equation 4 acts as a strict per-action speed limit—
ensuring the probability of taking one specific action doesn’t spike too drastically—PPO implementations frequently employ an additional, broader safety net. This is known as early stopping
based on Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence (Schulman et al., 2017).
To understand why this is necessary, consider our lumberjack once more. The clipping function
works perfectly for isolating and limiting a single enthusiastic update (like chopping a tree).
However, if the agent updates thousands of small, unclipped actions simultaneously across

a large batch of data, the cumulative effect might still fundamentally alter the agent’s overall
behavior.
KL divergence is a concept from information theory that measures exactly this: how much
one probability distribution diverges from a reference distribution. In our case, it measures the
mathematical "distance" between the agent’s new updated policy πθnew and its old policy πθold
before the current optimization step began. For discrete action spaces, it is defined as:
DKL (πθold ∥ πθnew ) =

X



πθold (a | s) log

a∈A

πθold (a | s)
πθnew (a | s)



(6)

Importantly, KL divergence is asymmetric (i.e., DKL (P ∥ Q) ̸= DKL (Q ∥ P )), meaning it specifically measures the information lost when the new policy is used to approximate the old policy’s
distribution. It is always non-negative and equals exactly zero only when the two policies are
identical.
Let us consider the lumberjack standing next to a tree. Under the old policy, it might have a 90%
probability of choosing to ‘Chop’ and a 10% probability of choosing to ‘Move’. If a single update
drastically shifts these probabilities to 10% ‘Chop’ and 90% ‘Move’, the KL divergence between
the two policies will spike. As illustrated in Figure 4, a massive spike indicates that the optimizer
has aggressively destroyed the previously learned behavior, potentially causing the agent to
forget fundamental skills.
Figure 4: Visualizing KL Divergence. A small divergence (left) preserves the core behavior
while optimizing safely. A large divergence (right) indicates the new policy has aggressively
abandoned the old behavior, potentially leading to catastrophic forgetting.
Destructive Update (Large DKL )

Safe Update (Small DKL )
Probability

Probability
πnew
πold

πold

πnew
Shift

Massive Shift

Actions

Actions

To prevent this catastrophic forgetting, PPO calculates an approximation of the KL divergence
during the training loop. If this calculated distance crosses a strict, predefined threshold
(the Target KL, typically around 0.01 to 0.015), the optimizer acts as an emergency brake. It
immediately aborts any remaining training epochs for that batch of data (Schulman et al., 2017).
This ensures that even if a wave of subtle updates slips past the cruise-control of the per-action
clipping mechanism, the agent’s "brain" is physically blocked from mutating too violently in a
single step.

2.2

Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Imagine our wood-collecting agent is no longer alone. We now introduce a second agent into
the grid, tasked with mining stone. Suddenly, the fundamental assumption of our standard MDP
(that the environment only changes when our agent acts) is shattered. Because both agents

update their policies and take actions concurrently, the environment becomes a moving target. If
the lumberjack moves toward a tree, but the miner accidentally blocks the path a millisecond
prior, the environment’s transition dynamics become non-stationary from the local perspective of
any individual agent (Albrecht et al., 2024).

2.2.1

Decentralized Partially Observable MDPs (Dec-POMDPs)

In complex multi-agent domains, an individual agent rarely possesses a god’s-eye view of the
entire grid. They suffer from local sensory limitations, perceiving only a cropped window of their
immediate surroundings.
As illustrated in Figure 5, this scenario is formally modeled as a Decentralized Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (Dec-POMDP) (Oliehoek et al., 2016). The diagram demonstrates
how the true global environment state is hidden behind an "observation emission filter," essentially creating a fog of war that forces each agent to act strictly on fragmented, local information.
Figure 5: The Dec-POMDP interaction framework. The true global state is obscured by an
observation filter, distributing localized views and a shared reward to decentralized agents.

Agent 1
πθ1 (a(1) |
τ (1) )

Agent N
πθN (a(N ) |
τ (N ) )
(1)

(N )

Local ot

Local ot

Observation Emission Filter
O(o | st , at−1 )
True State st
(1)

Action at

Global Environment
State st ∈ S

(N )

Action at

Shared Extrinsic Reward rtenv

To formalize this mathematically, we extend our previous MDP into the Dec-POMDP tuple
⟨N , S, A, P, R, Ω, O, γ⟩. We can map these variables directly to our cooperative scenario:
• N = {1, . . . , N } is the roster of active agents (e.g., Agent 1 Lumberjack, Agent 2 Miner).
• A = A1 × · · · × AN is the joint action space. At timestep t, agents simultaneously execute
(1)
(N )
a joint action at = (at , . . . , at ) ∈ A.
• Ω = Ω1 × · · · × ΩN is the joint observation space, representing the limited windows of
information each agent receives.
• O : S × A × Ω → [0, 1] is the observation probability distribution O(o | s′ , a). This acts as
the mathematical "filter" shown in Figure 5, determining what slice of the true state each
agent is permitted to see.
• R : S × A → R is the globally shared reward signal. If the agents successfully cooperate

to build a tool, this single scalar reward is emitted to all agents equally.
This structure introduces a critical mathematical consequence. Because an individual agent
(i)
i cannot perceive the full state st , a single observation ot ∈ Ωi instantly breaks the Markov
property we established in Section 2.1.1. The agent cannot rely solely on the present moment,
because its present observation is incomplete.
To restore temporal context, agent i must rely on its memory. It maintains an action-observation
(i)
(i) (i)
(i)
history τt = (o1 , a1 , . . . , ot ), and parameterizes its decentralized policy as πi (ai | τi ). While
standard feed-forward or Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) (Lecun_Bottou_Bengio_Haffner_1998)
are highly effective at extracting spatial features from a single isolated observation, they inherently lack the capacity to remember past states. This is why modern architectures implement this memory using Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). Gated variants like Long ShortTerm Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter_Schmidhuber_1997) or Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs)
(Chung_Gulcehre_Cho_Bengio_2014) are typically used to prevent the vanishing gradient
problem. By maintaining stable learning signals over time, these networks allow the agent
to build a continuous understanding of the environment from fragmented spatial snapshots
(Hausknecht_Stone_2015).

2.2.2

Centralized Training with Decentralized Execution (CTDE)

To resolve the fog of war without violating the strict rules of the game, modern MARL algorithms
adopt the Centralized Training with Decentralized Execution (CTDE) paradigm (Albrecht et al.,
2024).
CTDE applies a dual-perspective philosophy to our grid-world. As shown in Figure 6, during the
offline training phase, the algorithm acts as an omniscient supervisor. It utilizes a Centralized
Critic that has privileged, god’s-eye access to the global environment state st . Because it knows
the exact coordinates of both the lumberjack and the miner, it can accurately judge whether a
joint action was truly beneficial.
However, during online deployment, this centralized structure is severed. The Critic is discarded,
and the decentralized Actors are deployed to the grid. They must execute their policies independently, relying solely on their fragmented local action-observation histories (τi ) without knowing
the exact status of their partner.

Figure 6: The Centralized Training with Decentralized Execution (CTDE) architecture.
Centralized Training Phase
Global State st

Centralized Critic Vϕ (st )
Local History τ1
Advantage Ât

Local History τ2
Advantage Ât

Actor 1
π(a1 | τ1 )

Actor 2
π(a2 | τ2 )

Sever Critic
Deploy Policies

Local History τ1

Local History τ2

Actor 1 (Lumberjack)
π(a1 | τ1 )

Actor 2 (Miner)
π(a2 | τ2 )

Decentralized Execution Phase

2.2.3

Adapted from (Yu et al., 2022)

Multi-Agent Proximal Policy Optimization (MAPPO)

Before the widespread adoption of Actor-Critic methods in multi-agent settings, the field heavily
relied on value-decomposition techniques to solve the credit assignment problem. Algorithms like
Value-Decomposition Networks (VDN) (Sunehag_Lever_Gruslys_Czarnecki_Zambaldi_Jaderberg_Lanc
and QMIX (Rashid_Samvelyan_Witt_Farquhar_Foerster_Whiteson_2018) became popular
by factorizing a global reward into individual agent contributions. QMIX, for example, enforces
a strict monotonic relationship between the global value and the local values of the agents.
However, these structural constraints limit the types of cooperative tasks these algorithms can
solve effectively (Castellini_2022).
More recently, research has demonstrated that on-policy Actor-Critic methods can avoid these
constraints altogether while matching or exceeding the performance of off-policy factorization
methods. Multi-Agent PPO (MAPPO) brings our grid-world to life by extending the single-agent
PPO architecture directly into the CTDE paradigm (Yu et al., 2022). The elegance of MAPPO
lies in its simplicity: the decentralized Actors remain mathematically identical to standard PPO,
while only the Centralized Critic is modified to process the global environment state.
The Centralized Critic Network (Value), parameterized by ϕ, learns the value function Vϕ (st ).
Crucially, st is the unclipped global joint state. In our RPG scenario, while the lumberjack only
sees the trees immediately in front of them, the Critic sees the entire map, knowing exactly where
both the lumberjack and the miner are located, and what resources they hold. By estimating

baseline returns using this true reality of the board, the Critic stabilizes the variance in its
Advantage calculations. It is optimized by minimizing the Mean Squared Error against the actual
calculated returns R̂t (Yu et al., 2022):
LVF (ϕ) =

B X
N 
2
1 X
Vϕ (st,k ) − R̂t,k
B · N i=1 k=1

(7)

where N represents the number of agents, and B represents the batch size (the number of
environment transitions sampled during a training update). This equation simply averages the
prediction error across all agents and all sampled experiences.
Simultaneously, the decentralized Actors (the lumberjack and the miner) learn their respective
policies πθi (ai | τi ). Because they operate in the fog of war, their inputs are restricted strictly to
their localized action-observation histories (τi ). Each Actor updates its weights using the exact
same clipped surrogate objective from Equation 4.
As shown in Figure 6, the gradient flow is strictly separated. The global state error updates
only the Critic’s weights (ϕ), while the Critic passes its computed Advantage signal to the
Actors. The lumberjack and miner then use this Advantage to update their own weights (θi ).
This clear separation enables MAPPO to achieve sample efficiency in complex cooperative
benchmarks (Yu et al., 2022).

2.3

Curriculum Learning

Some environments suffer from extremely sparse rewards, meaning agents only receive feedback
after completing a long sequence of actions. When this happens, an alternative to altering the
agent’s internal architecture is to alter the environment itself. Bengio et al. (2009) formalized this
concept as Curriculum Learning, drawing inspiration from human education.
Rather than training a model on the most difficult data (or the most complex RL environment)
from the start, the agent is first exposed to simplified, easily solvable versions of the task. As the
agent masters these basic concepts, the environment’s complexity is progressively increased. In
reinforcement learning, this typically means a human designer must manually craft a sequence
of environments. For example, starting the agent in a tiny grid with the target one step away, and
gradually expanding the grid size and adding obstacles.

Although effective, this traditional approach suffers from scalability issues due to its reliance on
manual engineering. To overcome this, the field shifted toward Automated Curriculum Learning
(ACL), where algorithms dynamically adjust the environment parameters (Portelas_Colas_Weng_Hofmann_
However, generating entirely new physical environments on the fly introduces significant computational overhead and non-stationarity. If the physical rules or map layouts constantly change, the
agents struggle to stabilize their policies. Therefore, rather than altering the environment from
the outside, a more stable solution is to alter the agent’s cognitive abstractions from the inside.
By shaping the internal rewards or providing discrete skill milestones, techniques explored in the
following section, we can guide agents through complex dependencies without ever needing to
rebuild the world around them.

2.4

Temporal Abstraction and Reward Shaping

While MAPPO exhibits strong sample efficiency in dense tasks, it struggles catastrophically in
long-horizon domains gated by sparse rewards. If our lumberjack and miner only receive a shared
+10 reward when the final enemy is defeated, the probability of them randomly discovering the
exact sequence of chopping wood, mining stone, and crafting weapons approaches zero. To
mitigate this exploration bottleneck, structural abstraction techniques are required.

2.4.1

Potential-Based Reward Shaping (PBRS)

Reward shaping attempts to solve this exploration problem by supplementing the sparse environmental reward renv with an auxiliary dense signal F (s, s′ ), gently guiding the agent toward
the desired objective. However, unconstrained reward additions frequently alter the underlying
MDP, causing agents to discover local optima or engage in reward hacking (e.g., farming points
by repeating an action without actually progressing).
To prevent this policy distortion, Ng et al. (1999) proved that a shaping signal F (s, s′ ) preserves
the optimal policy set π ∗ if and only if it is expressed as the difference of a state potential function
Φ(s) (Ng et al., 1999):
F (s, s′ ) = γΦ(s′ ) − Φ(s)
(8)
where the potential function Φ : S → R evaluates any state and outputs a scalar score. In our
grid-world, think of Φ(s) as a literal hot-and-cold compass pointing the lumberjack toward the
nearest tree. Adding F (s, s′ ) to the environment reward creates an augmented, safe signal
rttotal = rtenv + F (st , st+1 ).
As demonstrated in Figure 7, the discount factor γ is mathematically vital. It acts as a friction
mechanism, taxing the agent’s movement. When the agent steps forward to a higher potential
state, the reward is slightly discounted. However, when it steps backward to a lower potential
state, the penalty outweighs the previous gain. Because any cyclic loop yields a net negative
P
t
return (e.g., ∞
t=0 γ F (st , st+1 ) = −Φ(s0 )), this formulation guarantees policy invariance while
providing dense guidance (Ng et al., 1999).
Figure 7: The anti-farming mechanism of PBRS. The discount factor γ = 0.99 ensures that
returning to a previous state penalizes the agent more heavily than the forward step rewarded it.
This yields a net loss for cyclic behavior (e.g., +9.8 − 10.1 = −0.3), preventing infinite reward
loops.
Forward: 0.99(20) − 10 = +9.8

Φ = 10

Φ = 20

Backward: 0.99(10) − 20 = −10.1

2.4.2

The Options Framework for Hierarchical RL

Rather than modifying the reward landscape, Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (HRL)
achieves temporal abstraction by organizing low-level actions into high-level macro-structures.

The Options Framework formalizes these macro-actions over MDPs (Sutton; Precup, et al.,
1999). Rather than forcing a single policy to decide whether to step north or south at every
millisecond, HRL introduces a higher-level cognitive hierarchy. A Meta-Controller can select
a discrete Option o ∈ O, such as COLLECT_WOOD, which then dictates those low-level kinetic
movements.
This Option is defined by the triple ⟨Io , πo , βo ⟩ (Sutton; Precup, et al., 1999):
• Io ⊆ S is the initiation set. The COLLECT_WOOD Option can only be initiated if the lumberjack
does not already have wood in its inventory.
• πo (a | s) is the intra-option policy governing primitive execution. This is the low-level
MAPPO policy that actually steers the agent to the tree and executes the ’Chop’ command.
• βo : S → [0, 1] is the stochastic termination condition, giving the probability βo (s) that
option o terminates in state s. For the lumberjack, this triggers at 100% probability the
moment the wood enters the inventory.
When an option o is selected, the intra-option policy πo controls primitive actions until the
termination condition βo triggers. This transforms the underlying decision process into a SemiMarkov Decision Process (SMDP) operating over variable temporal steps (Sutton; Precup, et al.,
1999).
By abstracting the kinetic physics of the grid into discrete semantic tasks, the Options framework
sets the stage for a high-level cognitive controller. As explored in the next chapter, this architecture allows Large Language Models to act as these strategic orchestrators, entirely bypassing
the random exploration bottleneck.

3

The Semantic Engine: Large Language Models

In the previous chapter, we established how the Options framework allows our lumberjack and
miner to execute discrete macro-actions, such as COLLECT_WOOD or BUILD_BRIDGE. However,
MARL agents cannot inherently deduce the logical sequence of these macro-actions. This
chapter introduces the theoretical foundations of Large Language Models (LLMs) and their
optimization mechanisms. It establishes how these autoregressive models can act as a highlevel "Commander," parsing the semantic state of the grid-world and issuing the correct strategic
sequence to the agents below.

3.1

Foundations of Causal Language Modeling (CLM)

To serve as a Meta-Controller in a reinforcement learning environment, a model must be able to
process a current state and make a sequential decision. This makes Causal Language Models
(CLMs) the ideal architecture (Radford et al., 2018).
Unlike standard RL policies that output continuous spatial coordinates, CLMs operate over
massive discrete vocabularies. They generate text autoregressively, meaning they predict the
next logical token (word or sub-word) based strictly on the sequence of past tokens. This
step-by-step generation perfectly mirrors the step-by-step decision-making process of an RL
agent.
Modern CLMs, including the Qwen architecture utilized in this thesis (Yang et al., 2025), rely
entirely on the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017). To understand this conceptually,
imagine our Commander receives a text context: "Agent has Wood and Stone, craft a..." As
illustrated in Figure 8, to accurately predict the next target token ("Pickaxe"), the network must
understand the relationship between "Wood", "Stone", and "craft" despite the distance between
these words in the sentence. Transformers achieve this by dispensing with temporal recurrence
in favor of parallelizable self-attention mechanisms.
Figure 8: The Causal Language Modeling (CLM) autoregressive generation and training loop.
CrossEntropy Loss
LCLM

Target yi∗
"Pickaxe"

Gradient ∇Θ

Context X
"Agent has Wood,
and Stone, craft..."

Transformer
Decoder
(Masked Attention)

Logits

Softmax
P (yi | X)

Appended to Context (Autoregressive Loop)

Next
Token yi
"Pickaxe"

3.1.1

Scaled Dot-Product Attention and Causal Masking

The core computational engine that allows the model to connect these distant concepts is Scaled
Dot-Product Attention. For a given input sequence, the model embeds the tokens into three
distinct weight matrices: Queries (Q), Keys (K), and Values (V ) (Vaswani et al., 2017).
• Query (Q): What the current token is looking for (e.g., the word "craft" sends a query
searching for materials).
• Key (K): What previous tokens contain (e.g., "Wood" and "Stone" hold keys identifying
them as available materials).
• Value (V ): The actual semantic content extracted if the Query and Key match.
The attention mechanism computes a weighted sum of these values, where the weight is
determined by how well the query and the key match via a dot-product:
QK T
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax √
dk

!

(9)

V

√
There are two critical mathematical safeguards in this equation. First is the scaling factor, dk
(the square root of the key vector dimension). If Q and K are large, their dot product grows
massive. Feeding massive numbers into a softmax function causes it to saturate, snapping its
outputs to absolute 1s and 0s. This flattens the mathematical slope (the gradient) to zero, halting
the network’s ability to learn, a phenomenon known as the vanishing gradient problem. Dividing
√
by dk cools these values down, preserving the gradient.
Second, because we are using a Causal Language Model, the network must not be allowed to
cheat by looking into the future. During training, the entire text sequence is fed into the Transformer simultaneously for parallel processing efficiency. In a standard full-attention mechanism,
the QK T matrix computes the dot-product relationship between every token and every other
token all at once. If our sequence is "Agent has Wood and Stone", the first token "Agent" would
mathematically be able to query the future token "Wood" to help predict the second token "has".
This would give the model an impossible advantage during training that it would not have during
real-time generation.
To prevent this information leak, a strict lower-triangular mask is applied to the QK T matrix
before the softmax function. This mask overrides the raw attention scores of all future tokens
with negative infinity (−∞). When the softmax function is applied, the exponential function e−∞
evaluates to exactly zero, completely severing the connection to future words.
Visually, for a sequence of 4 tokens,
isolate the intermediate weight matrix W from
 weT can

QK
Equation 8 (specifically, the softmax √d
component) to see how the causal mask operates
k
before the final multiplication by the Values (V ):








s
−∞ −∞ −∞
w
0
0
0
 1,1
  1,1

s



0
0 
 2,1 s2,2 −∞ −∞ w2,1 w2,2

W = softmax 
 = 

s3,1 s3,2 s3,3 −∞ w3,1 w3,2 w3,3

0

 

s4,1 s4,2 s4,3 s4,4
w4,1 w4,2 w4,3 w4,4

(10)

where si,j represents the raw, scaled dot-product score between query i and key j (an element of

T

√
the QK
matrix), and wi,j represents the final valid probability weight. As shown in Equation ??,
dk
when the model is processing token 3 (row 3), it can only attend to past and current tokens 1, 2,
and 3. The connection to the future token 4 is mathematically erased (0). This resulting weight
matrix W is then multiplied by the Value matrix V to produce the final output of the attention
mechanism.

3.1.2

The Autoregressive Loop and Optimization

The softmax function converts the raw attention scores into a valid probability distribution. At the
very end of the network, a final softmax layer converts the model’s output into the probability
P (yi ) of the next token over the entire vocabulary.
The generation process behaves like a strict deterministic time-loop: the model predicts a
single word, and that new word instantly becomes part of the unchangeable past context
used to predict the very next word (as shown by the blue feedback loop in Figure 8). It is
relevant to see how it learns at first when it is trained even so we won’t train from a moel
from scratch in our implementation. Given a context sequence X and a target sequence of
tokens y = (y1 , y2 , . . . , yN ), the network is optimized by minimizing the negative log-likelihood
(Categorical Cross-Entropy) over the sequence (Radford et al., 2018):
LCLM = −

N
1 X
log P (yi | y<i , X; Θ)
N i=1

(11)

where Θ represents the parameters of the neural network. As visualized by the backward
gradient flow in Figure 8, it penalizes the model when the probability assigned to the correct
target token yi∗ is too low, and gradients (∇Θ ) are backpropagated to update the model weights.
This foundational pre-training over trillions of words endows LLMs with vast latent world models,
encompassing logical dependencies, domain knowledge, and common-sense heuristics.
But why is this specific architecture so critical for our multi-agent framework? During a standard
MARL episode, the local Qwen model acts as a frozen, inference-only "Commander". It is not
actively learning or updating its weights via Equation 9. Instead, we rely entirely on the Attention
Mechanism (Equation 8) to perform in-context reasoning. When we feed the model the full
game state as a prompt (e.g., "Agent 1 is at [2,3] and holds Wood and Stone. It must craft a
Pickaxe,"), the attention mechanism is exactly what allows the network to mathematically link
the available inventory ("Wood", "Stone") with the goal ("Pickaxe") to deduce the correct next
macro-action. The autoregressive generation loop then allows it to construct and output the
command GO_TO_WORKBENCH step-by-step.
However, as we will explore in the following section, relying purely on a base model’s general
knowledge is often insufficient for formatting precise JSON commands. We must first adapt this
foundation using parameter-efficient fine-tuning (QLoRA) prior to deployment.

3.2

Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (QLoRA)

While a base LLM understands general logic, it does not inherently know how to act as a
programmatic controller. In our MARL environment, the Python simulation cannot parse a
conversational paragraph; it requires the Commander’s output to be a rigidly formatted JSON
object. This structured format allows the environment to reliably sample and extract specific
data points, such as priority weights for the Mixing Board, or categorical string options like
CRAFT_PICKAXE for the Meta-Controller.
Teaching a base model these specific formatting rules via full parameter fine-tuning requires
massive GPU clusters, rendering it infeasible for local execution alongside a MARL training
loop. To mitigate this, this thesis utilizes Quantized Low-Rank Adaptation (QLoRA) (Dettmers;
Pagnoni, et al., 2023). Conceptually, imagine the base LLM is a massive, immutable public
library of knowledge. Rather than rewriting every book in the library, QLoRA simply slips a highly
specialized, lightweight guidebook into the building that tells the model exactly how to format its
thoughts into JSON for our grid-world.

3.2.1

Quantization and Low-Rank Matrices

Mathematically, this memory saving is achieved in two steps. First, QLoRA freezes the model’s
pre-trained weight matrix, W0 ∈ Rd×k , using 4-bit NormalFloat (NF4) quantization (Dettmers;
Pagnoni, et al., 2023; Hu et al., 2021). To understand quantization, imagine converting a highresolution, 32-bit digital photograph into an 8-bit retro pixel image. While you lose microscopic
precision, the overall shape and meaning of the image remain perfectly clear, and the file size
shrinks drastically. NF4 quantization applies this exact compression to the neural weights,
drastically reducing the VRAM required to hold the model’s foundational knowledge in memory.
Second, because W0 is now frozen and cannot be updated, we must inject trainable parameters.
As illustrated in Figure 9, LoRA injects two small, low-rank adapter matrices alongside the frozen
base: matrix A ∈ Rr×k and matrix B ∈ Rd×r (Hu et al., 2021; Dettmers; Pagnoni, et al., 2023).
To visualize why this is so efficient, consider a theoretical weight matrix W0 with dimensions
10, 000 × 10, 000. Updating this full matrix would require learning 100,000,000 parameters.
Instead, LoRA introduces a "bottleneck" defined by the rank r. If we choose a tiny rank, such as
r = 8, matrix A becomes 8 × 10, 000 (80,000 parameters) and matrix B becomes 10, 000 × 8
(80,000 parameters). By multiplying them together (B × A), we reconstruct a matrix ∆W that is
still 10, 000 × 10, 000, but we only had to train 160,000 actual parameters (a reduction of over
99.8%). Equation ?? illustrates this bottleneck visually for a small 4 × 4 matrix with rank r = 1,
where training only 8 parameters is required to reconstruct all 16 weights:
 



b
b a
 1
 1 1
b 
h
i b a
 2
 2 1
  × a1 a2 a3 a4 = 
b3 
|
{z
} 
 
b3 a1
1×4
A∈R
b4
b4 a1
| {z }

B∈R4×1

|

b1 a2
b2 a2
b3 a2
b4 a2

b1 a3
b2 a3
b3 a3
b4 a3
{z

∆W ∈R4×4



b1 a4

b2 a4 


b3 a4 

b4 a4
}

(12)

Figure 9: The Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) architecture.
Output h

⊕

W0 x

× Weights Frozen
∇W0 Discarded

Frozen Base
Knowledge (4-bit NF4)
W0 ∈ Rd×k

BAx

Adapter B
∈ Rd×r

∇B Updates B

Ax Rank r ≪ min(d, k)

Adapter A
∈ Rr×k

∇A Updates A

Input x
Adapted from (Hu et al., 2021)

3.2.2

The Forward Pass and Backpropagation

To ensure that these untrained adapters do not inject random noise into the network at the
beginning of training, matrix A is initialized with random Gaussian values, while matrix B is
initialized as a strict zero matrix (Hu et al., 2021). As a result, their initial product BA = 0.
During the forward pass (when the model is generating text), the input x flows through both the
frozen base model and the new adapters. The modified forward pass is defined as:
h = W0 x + ∆W x = W0 x +

α
(BA)x
r

(13)

where α is a constant scaling factor (Hu et al., 2021; Dettmers; Pagnoni, et al., 2023). Conceptually, α acts as a volume knob. It determines how "loudly" the new specialized JSON-formatting
knowledge (BA) should be blended into the general world knowledge (W0 ).
Once this forward pass is complete and the model generates its sequence, how does it actually
learn to fix its mistakes? This is where the Causal Language Modeling loss (LCLM ) from
Equation 9 returns to the stage (Dettmers; Pagnoni, et al., 2023). If the model outputs a
malformed JSON, the LCLM calculates the mathematical error between the model’s output and
the true desired output.
The optimizer then uses backpropagation to send this error signal backward through the network
to update the weights. As visualized by the localized gradient annotations in Figure 9, the
computational brilliance of QLoRA is realized exclusively during this backward pass (Dettmers;
Pagnoni, et al., 2023). When the gradients (the update instructions, ∇W0 ) reach the massive W0
matrix, they are simply discarded, because W0 is frozen (Dettmers; Pagnoni, et al., 2023).
Instead, the error signal flows down the new adapter pathway via the Chain Rule of calculus.
Let L represent the loss and ∂L
∂h represent the error signal arriving from the network’s output.
Because the forward pass computes B(Ax), the backward pass encounters matrix B first. As
shown in Equation ??, calculating the gradient for B (∇B ) relies on the cached forward outputs

of A. To calculate the gradient for A (∇A ), the error signal must flow backward through the
transpose of B (B T ):
α ∂L
(Ax)T
r ∂h
∂L T
α
x
∇A = B T
r
∂h

∇B =

(14)

This mathematical sequence proves why ∇B can be calculated immediately using the forward
activations, while calculating ∇A explicitly requires the error signal to pass through B T .
Understanding this localized gradient flow is critical to the feasibility of this thesis. In standard
RL, agents are relatively small neural networks. However, if our training loop had to calculate
and store the gradient ∇W0 for all 7 billion parameters of the Qwen LLM, the workstation would
immediately crash due to an Out-Of-Memory (OOM) error. By mathematically restricting the
backpropagation updates exclusively to ∇A and ∇B , we avoid allocating these massive gradient
tensors. The optimizer selectively applies these lightweight updates only to the low-dimensional
adapter matrices (Dettmers; Pagnoni, et al., 2023).
Combined, this targeted gradient flow and aggressive 4-bit quantization reduce overall VRAM
consumption by up to 75% compared to full fine-tuning (Dettmers; Pagnoni, et al., 2023). This
ultimate computational efficiency is precisely what enables our Qwen Commander to learn its
JSON-formatting rules locally, running seamlessly alongside the heavy MAPPO environment
without exhausting the workstation’s memory budget.

3.3

The Qwen Architecture and Model Selection

To serve as the cognitive controller in a MARL system, the chosen foundation model must
possess spatial reasoning and reliable instruction-following capabilities. Because the model
must run locally alongside the synchronous MAPPO tensor rollouts, parameter size and inference
latency become the primary engineering constraints. A model that generates complex semantic
plans but requires 30 seconds to output a response will stall the high-frequency reinforcement
learning loop.
To identify a suitable Meta-Controller, several modern open-weights architectures were empirically evaluated via the Ollama inference framework. Ollama was selected for its native support
of quantized models, which reduces the memory footprint of large language models while
maintaining acceptable inference speeds. The candidate pool included models ranging from 2
billion to 27 billion parameters, specifically llama3.2:latest (2B), qwen2.5:7b, llama3.1:8b,
gemma2:9b, and gemma3:27b.
During preliminary testing, models at the extremes of this parameter spectrum proved unsuitable for the synchronous training loop. Lightweight models, such as llama3.2 (2B), offered
near-instantaneous inference but struggled to reliably respect the JSON schema required by
the Python backend, frequently leading to parsing crashes. Conversely, larger models like
gemma3:27b exhibited strong logic capabilities and consistent formatting but required approximately 17 GB of VRAM even with quantization. Given the target deployment hardware (a
consumer-grade NVIDIA RTX 5070 with 12 GB of VRAM), the 27B model exceeded the physical

memory budget entirely, causing immediate out-of-memory errors before the MAPPO environment could even be initialized.
Among the mid-range models (qwen2.5:7b, llama3.1:8b, and gemma2:9b), differences in instruction following and context processing became apparent. While both LLaMA 3.1 and
Gemma 2 fit within the memory envelope and performed adequately on general reasoning
tasks, they occasionally hallucinated keys or deviated from the strict JSON hierarchy required
for parsing environment commands. In contrast, qwen2.5:7b demonstrated more reliable
capabilities for programmatic orchestration. Standard industry benchmarks support this empirical observation: as shown in Table ??, Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct outperforms its peers in both
zero-shot coding and multi-step reasoning (measured by HumanEval and GSM8K, respectively)1 (Qwen_Yang_Yang_Zhang_Hui_Zheng_Yu_Li_Liu_Huang_et_al_2024).
Table 1: Comparison of zero-shot coding and multi-step reasoning performance among midrange models.
Model
Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct
Llama 3.1 8B Instruct
Gemma 2 9B

HumanEval (%)

GSM8K (%)

84.8
72.6
40.2

91.6
84.5
68.6

Adapted from (Qwen_Yang_Yang_Zhang_Hui_Zheng_Yu_Li_Liu_Huang_et_al_2024)

Because the Meta-Controller must parse spatial data and output strict, unbroken JSON commands, this gap in coding and reasoning performance is a deciding factor. Ultimately, this thesis
leverages the Qwen 2.5 7B architecture (Qwen_Yang_Yang_Zhang_Hui_Zheng_Yu_Li_Liu_Huang_et_al
At roughly 4.7 GB of VRAM usage, it fits within the hardware constraints without interfering
with concurrent PyTorch processes. Qwen 2.5 strikes a practical balance between speed and
reasoning: it provides fast, latency-bound token generation while possessing the logical capacity
required to navigate task dependency graphs (DAGs). The architecture’s extensive pre-training
on code and structured data translates well to the deterministic formatting needed for an RL
controller. By coupling this efficient base model with QLoRA fine-tuning, the 7B parameters can
be locally specialized to act as a reliable, low-latency orchestrator.

3.4

Neuro-Symbolic Orchestration and Verbal Reflection

As established in Section 2.4, pure deep reinforcement learning struggles with severe exploration
bottlenecks in sparse-reward environments. While the Options Framework offers a mathematical
solution to temporal abstraction, designing the rules for when to trigger an Option traditionally
demands extensive human engineering.
Because LLMs develop powerful logic and reasoning skills during their initial pre-training, they
can be deployed as zero-shot 2 semantic orchestrators. This means the model can manage
1

2

HumanEval evaluates a model’s ability to synthesize functional Python programs, while GSM8K (Grade
School Math 8K) tests its capacity to solve multi-step logical problems.
In machine learning, "zero-shot" refers to a model’s ability to successfully perform a task it was not explicitly
trained for, relying purely on generalized knowledge acquired during pre-training.

complex tasks right out of the box, completely bypassing the need for human engineers to write
manual, hard-coded decision rules. Frameworks such as ReAct (Yao et al., 2023) have shown
that interleaving language reasoning with concrete actions allows models to solve multi-step
problems autonomously. In reinforcement learning, systems like EUREKA (Ma et al., 2024) and
PRM4RL (Zhang et al., 2026) successfully use LLMs to automatically write and refine reward
functions.
Rather than relying on a single pre-existing framework, this thesis synthesizes these disparate
concepts into a unified, dual-tier architecture, building upon the principles of a Neuro-Symbolic
Hierarchy (Mitchener_2022). As illustrated in Figure 10, the high-level LLM Meta-Controller
analyzes the environment and dictates strategic goals (e.g., "Craft a Pickaxe") by reasoning over
a semantic Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) of task dependencies. These text-based decisions are
translated into discrete Options and passed down to the low-level MAPPO execution workers,
which handle the high-frequency kinetic control (e.g., navigating the grid and avoiding obstacles).
Figure 10: The Neuro-Symbolic Hierarchy.
High-Level Meta-Controller
(LLM reasoning
over semantic DAG)
JSON Priorities / Decisions

Staleness / Milestone Metrics

Translation Layer
(PBRS Logits or
Discrete Option ot )
Shaping Ft or State Vector eo

Low-Level Execution Workers
(MAPPO Policies πθ (a | s, o))

However, the low-level agents may sometimes fail to achieve the assigned goal. To solve this,
language agents can leverage Verbal Reflection (Shinn et al., 2023) to evaluate and correct
execution failures. As detailed in Figure 11, if the Commander issues a MINE_IRON option but
the miner stagnates and fails to complete it after 150 steps, the environment halts. A reflection
prompt containing the failure context is sent back to the LLM. This forces the model to explicitly
diagnose its mistake (e.g., realizing it forgot to assign CRAFT_PICKAXE first) and issue a corrected
macro-action.

Figure 11: The Verbal Reflection mechanism.
Environment
Staleness Trigger

Reflection Prompt
(Context + Failure)

Execution

Corrected
Discrete Option

JSON
Output

LLM Orchestrator
(Chain of Thought
(Wei et al., 2022))
Adapted from (Shinn et al., 2023)

Together, these assembled mechanisms form a complete neuro-symbolic feedback loop: the LLM
dictates the logical what, and the MAPPO algorithm learns the spatial how. Having established
the kinetic baseline of reinforcement learning and the semantic capabilities of large language
models, the theoretical foundation of this thesis is now complete. The following chapters will
demonstrate exactly how these components are engineered and deployed together, beginning
with the design of the dependency-driven testbed.

4

The Testbed: Engineering a Dependency-Driven World

Before detailing the neuro-symbolic architectures developed in this thesis, it is crucial to establish
the experimental testbed. The intersection of Large Language Models (LLMs) and Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning (MARL) requires an environment that exhibits both kinetic complexity
(movement, collision avoidance, spatial reasoning) and deep semantic dependencies (long
horizon tasks gated by logical preconditions). To this end, a custom 2D multi-agent grid-world
environment was engineered entirely from scratch.

4.1

Environment Design & Mechanics

The environment operates as a cooperative spatial grid where multiple agents must jointly gather
resources, craft tools, and defeat adversaries to achieve a final objective. Unlike standard
dense-reward environments—where agents receive incremental gradient signals based on
Euclidean distance to a target—this environment utilizes a logical sparse-reward formulation.
The agents receive meaningful extrinsic rewards solely upon the completion of discrete logical
milestones (subtasks).

4.1.1

The Dependency Graph (DAG)

The fundamental exploration challenge of the environment is formulated as a strict Directed
Acyclic Graph (DAG) of dependencies. Agents cannot arbitrarily navigate to the final goal; they
must coordinate to satisfy a rigid sequence of material and infrastructural preconditions. The
required topological task progression is illustrated in Figure 12.

Figure 12: The strict dependency Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) governing environment progression. Agents must jointly acquire basic resources to clear logical bottlenecks. Notably, Wood is
required for both the Pickaxe and the Bridge, while Iron supplies both Sword and Armor.
1a. Collect
Wood (x2)

2a. Build Bridge

1b. Collect Stone

2b. Craft Pickaxe

3. Mine Iron (x2)

4a. Craft Sword

4b. Craft Armor

5. Defeat Enemy

6. Mine Gold

As the topological depth of this chain increases, the probability of agents discovering the
complete sequence through purely random, entropy-driven exploration decays exponentially.
This rigid structure perfectly isolates the “exploration bottleneck” that our neuro-symbolic models
are designed to circumvent.

4.1.2

Action and Observation Spaces

The agents are trained under the Centralized Training with Decentralized Execution (CTDE)
paradigm. During the decentralized execution phase, each agent perceives a 14-dimensional
observation vector. Within this vector, the agents know exactly two things: where they are (the
absolute (x, y) coordinates of the agents) and what they have (the boolean status of the shared
inventory).
However, they are completely blind to the map layout. The environment strictly enforces the DecPOMDP partial observability (established in Section 2.2.1) by completely hiding the coordinates
of the target zones (resources, workbenches, enemies) from the state vector. Because the true
mathematical state of the environment includes these target locations, hiding them creates a
cognitive "fog of war." This forces the agents to physically explore the spatial grid to locate their
objectives, rather than simply calculating a direct mathematical path to a known coordinate.
The discrete action space consists of five parameters: four cardinal movement directions (Up,

Down, Left, Right) and one semantic “Interact” action. The interaction mechanic is highly contextsensitive; for instance, triggering the action while adjacent to a forest tile chops wood, whereas
executing it at a workbench (contingent upon possessing the requisite inventory) initiates tool
crafting.

4.1.3

Visual Representation

Figure 13 provides a visual representation of the discrete grid-world environment utilized throughout the MARL training process. The interface explicitly renders the underlying state matrix,
allowing human observers to track the spatial coordinates of the autonomous agents as they
navigate the map. It also visualizes the dynamic entity zones critical to the dependency DAG
(e.g., forests for wood harvesting, ore deposits for iron mining, and localized workbenches for
tool crafting). While the core simulation runs headlessly via highly optimized arrays to maximize
transition throughput, this renderer serves as an essential tool for visual debugging and policy
interpretation.
Figure 13: Visual rendering of the custom MARL environment. The interface explicitly renders
the underlying state matrix, allowing human observers to track the spatial coordinates of the
autonomous agents as they navigate the map.

Screenshot by Dorian Thomé 2026. Sprites generated by Gemini 1.5 Pro, Google. Prompt used: “generate each
sprites with different state if needed like enemy alive and dead and make sure we can distinguish each elements”
[generated July 10, 2026].

All visual assets utilized in this rendering engine, including the 2D pixel-art sprites representing
the workers, terrain tiles, and interactive elements, were procedurally generated using the Gemini
1.5 Pro model via the Antigravity coding assistant platform.

4.2

Architecture & Technology Stack

Engineering a custom MARL environment demands a rigorous assessment of the underlying
technology stack, requiring a delicate balance between visual debugging capabilities and raw,
parallelized simulation throughput.

4.2.1

The Necessity of Array-Native Execution over Game Engines

Initially, robust open-source game engines such as Godot (godot) were considered for the
simulation backbone. Godot provides a powerful visual editor, robust collision physics, and a
mature node-based hierarchy, making it an optimal choice for traditional game development.
However, modern on-policy deep reinforcement learning algorithms like MAPPO require simulating tens of millions of environment transitions to converge. Full-stack game engines introduce
massive computational overhead for rendering pipelines, audio processing, and internal state
management. Attempting to spawn hundreds of headless engine instances in parallel quickly
bottlenecks system memory and CPU inter-process communication.
As a result, the environment was engineered natively in Python utilizing Pygame (pygame)
and NumPy (numpy). This lower-level approach offers critical architectural advantages for
reinforcement learning:
• Headless Vectorization: The environment logic (kinematics, state transitions, collision
detection) is mathematically decoupled from the rendering loop. During the training loop,
the visual renderer is entirely disabled, allowing a vectorized wrapper to step thousands of
environments simultaneously without graphical overhead.
• Direct Tensor Integration: The underlying grid and inventory states are natively represented as NumPy arrays. This bypasses the expensive serialization and deserialization
bottlenecks typically encountered when passing state matrices between a Python-based
RL training script and an external C++ game engine, mitigating Python’s Global Interpreter
Lock (GIL) limitations during rollout collection.

4.3

Libraries & Infrastructure

The codebase relies on a modern, standardized stack of Python libraries to seamlessly interface
the custom environment with the deep neural networks and the large language models:
• MARL Interface: The environment conforms to the PettingZoo API (Terry et al., 2021),
which has established itself as the canonical standard for multi-agent RL (analogous to
the Gymnasium API for single-agent RL). Utilizing the Parallel API variant ensures the
environment integrates natively with synchronous MAPPO tensor rollouts.
• Deep Learning Framework: PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) serves as the computational
backbone for designing, compiling, and optimizing the MAPPO Actor and Critic networks,
leveraging GPU acceleration for Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE) and gradient
descent.
• LLM Integration: To interface with the semantic Meta-Controllers, the Transformers library

by Hugging Face is deployed (Wolf et al., 2020). For the Hierarchical Reinforcement
Learning phase (which necessitates rapid, localized inference), the language models are
quantized using bitsandbytes (QLoRA) (Dettmers; Pagnoni, et al., 2023) and served via
highly optimized inference engines to strictly bound the latency introduced during the
training loop.

4.4

Hardware and Inference Architecture

A critical bottleneck in neuro-symbolic MARL is the severe latency introduced by the LLM during
the training loop. This thesis relies on two distinct inference paradigms—online cloud APIs and
localized serving—dictated by the constraints of the specific algorithms.
For the Dynamic Reward Shaping architecture, which requires infrequent, highly complex
offline generation, this study leveraged the Gemini 2.5 Flash model hosted via Google AI
Studio3 . However, integrating cloud-based models directly into the high-frequency Hierarchical
Reinforcement Learning (HRL) training loop proved intractable. The MAPPO environment
requires thousands of synchronous environment steps per episode. Utilizing an online model for
the HRL orchestrator generated an excessive volume of requests, rapidly exhausting API rate
limits and introducing network latency that stalled the GPU-bound RL rollouts.
To overcome this, the HRL training loop was executed entirely locally on a consumer-grade workstation equipped with an NVIDIA RTX 5070 GPU (12GB VRAM). Running a foundation model
locally alongside the PyTorch MAPPO actor-critic tensors within a strict 12GB memory envelope
necessitated specific architectural compromises. To address this, the Ollama framework4 was
deployed to provide highly optimized, low-latency local inference.
The Qwen 2.5 7B architecture was explicitly chosen as the local orchestrator over other openweights alternatives (such as LLaMA 3 or Mistral) for two primary reasons. First, its parameter
scale, when combined with 4-bit quantization, allowed it to fit comfortably within the VRAM
constraints without displacing the MARL experience replay buffers. Second, its inherent dual
architecture—combining a dedicated thinking mode for complex chain-of-thought routing with a
non-thinking mode for rapid spatial reasoning—allowed the agent to process the strict dependency DAG effectively without necessitating a larger, memory-prohibitive parameter count.

3
4

https://aistudio.google.com/
https://ollama.com/

5

The Mixing Board: LLM-Driven Reward Shaping

This section details the first integration strategy: LLM-driven dynamic reward shaping, informally
referred to as the Mixing Board approach. Intuitively, this approach separates strategy from
execution. Returning to our established metaphor, the LLM acts as the Commander standing at
a strategic mixing board, adjusting priority dials for various subtasks. Meanwhile, the low-level
PPO agents (the lumberjack and miner) (Yu et al., 2022) act as the kinetic workers, navigating
the physical grid-world to fulfill whichever priority is currently dialed highest.
The Commander does not act directly inside the environment. Instead, it periodically observes
the agents’ progress and adjusts a vector of subtask priority weights. These weights govern two
things: (i) which semantic goal the agents’ internal planner selects, and (ii) the magnitude of the
gravitational pull (potential-based shaping signal) guiding the agents toward that goal.
This paradigm aligns with a growing body of work using LLMs as meta-level reward designers for
RL. For instance, EUREKA (Ma et al., 2024) demonstrated that an LLM can write and iteratively
refine reward functions that exceed human design. Similarly, PRM4RL (Zhang et al., 2026) uses
LLMs to decompose tasks and generate dense shaping rewards. More recently, MEDS (Liu et al.,
2026) introduced memory-enhanced dynamic shaping to penalize redundant behaviors, while
GLARE (Yan et al., 2026) proposed translating trajectory events into temporal logic formulas for
dense reward assignment.
The present work shares this motivation but operates at a much faster, latency-bound granularity.
Rather than writing entirely new reward functions from scratch, our Commander simply adjusts
a vector of priority weights that steer goal selection within a fixed, mathematically safe potentialbased shaping framework.
The exposition of this chapter follows the exact chronological dataflow of the implementation:
1. DAG-Conditional Planning (section 5.2): The system prunes impossible tasks based on
the agents’ current inventory, preventing the Commander from issuing invalid orders.
2. LLM Weight Query (section 5.4): The Commander is queried to assign raw semantic
priorities to the remaining valid subtasks.
3. Softmax Budget Normalisation (section 5.5): The Commander’s raw priorities are
mathematically smoothed into a rigorously bounded probability distribution.
4. Potential-Based Reward Shaping (section 5.6): The normalized budget is injected into
the training loop as a dense, magnetic reward signal to guide the workers.

5.1

System Overview

Figure 14 illustrates the end-to-end pipeline of the Mixing Board architecture. Conceptually, the
system operates in a continuous loop. At every standard environment step, the agents update
their inventory, the DAG Planner assigns them a valid target, and the PBRS module feeds them
a shaped reward to guide their movement.
However, at the end of every training update, a Critic Trigger acts as a diagnostic monitor.
It watches the agents’ learning curves (TD-error and success rates). If the trigger detects

that the lumberjack and miner are stuck at a learning plateau (spinning their wheels without
making progress), it halts the system. It constructs a prompt detailing the failure, queries the
LLM Commander for a new strategic direction, filters that new direction through a safety layer
(RewardInjector), and updates the planner to pull the agents out of their rut.
Figure 14: Dataflow of the LLM Dynamic “Mixing Board” approach. Solid arrows denote highfrequency per-step operations (execution); the dashed arrow indicates low-frequency per-update
monitoring (strategy).
rtshaped

Env Step
st → st+1

inventory

DAG Planner
πgoal (w)

(i)

gt

PBRS
F (s, s′ , g)

w
TD stats

Critic Trigger
(Plateau + Z-score)

5.2

prompt

LLM Query
(Logit output)

craw

RewardInjector
(Softmax + EMA)

DAG-Conditional Planner

Before the LLM’s weights can be applied, we must ensure the Commander cannot assign
impossible tasks. The crafting environment enforces a strict dependency graph over subtasks,
as established by the topological task progression in Figure 12.

5.2.1

Greedy Planner and Base Rewards

For each parallel environment, the planner acts as a logical filter. It inspects the agents’ current
shared inventory vector x ∈ Z10 and builds a set of feasible subtasks, denoted as F (i) (x).
For example, Agent 0 (the Lumberjack) might be restricted to targeting {Wood, Workbench,
Bridge, Enemy}, while Agent 1 (the Miner) might target {Stone, Workbench, Iron, Enemy, Gold}.
A subtask only enters this feasible set if its DAG preconditions are met; if the agents have
not yet crafted a Pickaxe (xpickaxe = 0), then mining Iron is mathematically masked out of the
options (Albrecht et al., 2024).
Once the impossible tasks are pruned, the planner must decide which of the valid tasks to
pursue. It does this by calculating a score sj for each feasible subtask j:
sj = Rjbase · wj

(15)

This score is the product of two distinct forces:
1. Intrinsic Difficulty (Rjbase ): A hand-crafted base reward that encodes the structural depth
of the task. Deep-tree tasks receive high base rewards (e.g., Rgold = 15) because they are
harder to reach, while trivial early tasks receive low rewards (e.g., Rwood = 1).
2. Commander Urgency (wj ): The dynamic multiplier provided by the LLM. If the base
rewards were uniformly 1.0, the LLM would have to output extreme, destabilizing weights

to convince an agent to walk past a trivial piece of wood to mine deep-game gold. The
base reward provides the natural gravity, and the LLM simply tweaks the dial.
The agent then greedily selects the subtask with the highest resulting score to be its active goal
g (i) :
g (i) = arg max Rjbase · wj
(16)
j∈F (i) (x)

While the planner only selects the single maximum value to dictate the agent’s immediate
target, the remaining weights are not permanently discarded. Because the system employs
time-smoothing (detailed in section 5.5.1), a lower-ranked weight might continuously rise across
subsequent timesteps until it ultimately overtakes the current leader, ensuring smooth and stable
goal transitions.
In practice, evaluating this logic across 128 parallel training environments requires strict vectorisation. This is handled by the Python backend which computes these conditional scores
dynamically for each agent.

5.2.2

Cooperative Coupling Guardrail

Because the environment is fully cooperative, certain tasks require synchronized presence.
If either agent selects a cooperative bottleneck task (such as returning to the Workbench or
building the Bridge), the planner overrides individual greedy selections and magnetically pulls
the partner agent to the same target, ensuring they co-locate to trigger the interaction.

5.2.3

DAG Guardrails

Finally, before the Commander’s weight vector is even allowed to touch the planner, it must pass
through a hard programmatic filter (apply_dag_guardrails). While LLMs are powerful semantic
reasoners, they are prone to hallucinations. If the LLM assigns a high priority to mining Iron
(wiron > 0) when no pickaxe exists, it would inject severe noise into the PPO value network. This
programmatic guardrail acts as an absolute constraint layer, zeroing out hallucinated weights
and overriding the LLM output to maintain mathematical stability.

5.3

Two-Stage Critic Trigger

If the LLM Commander were to issue new orders at every single step, the system would collapse
under inference latency, and the PPO agents would never have the stable environment necessary
to learn low-level kinetic tasks. Therefore, the Commander only intervenes when the agents are
genuinely stuck. The system determines this using a mathematical two-stage gate evaluated at
the end of each PPO update iteration.

5.3.1

Stage 1: The Plateau Gate (Production Stalled)

First, the system monitors the agents’ actual production rate. A rolling window of the last W
success-rate values is maintained. The first gate opens only when the improvement in task

completion over the previous window falls below a negligible threshold ϵ:

gate_open ⇐⇒

−1
−1
X
1 WX
1 2W
ρt−k −
ρt−k
W k=0
W k=W

|

{z

ρ̄recent

}

|

{z

ρ̄older

< ϵ

(17)

}

where ρt is the success rate at update t, W is the plateau_window (default 10), and ϵ is the
plateau_threshold (default 0.02). W acts as a low-pass filter on the inherently noisy RL
training signal. It ensures the Commander is not bothered by a single bad batch of trajectories,
but only alerted when the smoothed trend shows that the lumberjack and miner have completely
stalled. Additionally, this gate opens if any specific individual subtask has plateaued (variance
< 0.02 over 20 updates while remaining between 5% and 95% completion).

5.3.2

Stage 2: The Z-Score Trigger (The SOS Flare)

Just because production has stalled does not mean the agents need new orders; they might
simply be navigating a physically long path. To confirm they are actually stuck, the system looks
at the Centralized Critic.
As established in section 2.1.3, the TD-Error (Temporal Difference Error) measures the “surprise
gap” of the Critic network—the mathematical difference between its prior prediction and the
newly observed reality. A high mean TD-error is not necessarily alarming; it merely indicates
that the environment has a large reward scale.
However, a spike in TD-error variance is a critical failure metric. It means the Critic is fundamentally confused: it is seeing wildly different returns for the exact same states (e.g., sometimes
observing a massive reward, and sometimes a penalty for identical actions). This variance spike
occurs when agents get stuck at a bottleneck, thrash between uncoordinated goals, or experience
severe non-stationarity (Foerster_Nardelli_Farquhar_Afouras_Torr_Kohli_Whiteson_2017).
Therefore, variance acts as the mathematical SOS flare of a confused agent. Once the plateau
gate is open, the system checks whether the Critic’s TD-error variance has spiked beyond σ
standard deviations from its running mean:

z=

Var[δt ] − Var[δ]
σbase


>
max(η,
0.1)
Std Var[δ]

(18)

where δt is the TD error at update t, the bar denotes the running mean over a window of 100
updates, σbase = 1.5, and η is a sensitivity factor that decays multiplicatively by 0.995 after each
trigger, raising the effective threshold over time to prevent over-triggering.
If the gate is open and the Z-score trigger fires, an LLM intervention is dispatched to rescue the
agents, followed by a cooldown of 25 updates to give the new orders time to take effect.

5.4

LLM Weight Query: Continuous Logit Output

When the SOS flare fires, the PromptBuilder constructs a structured situation report for the
Commander. This prompt includes:
1. The trigger reason (plateau description, z-score value).
2. Current subtask completion percentages, with saturation flags (≥ 95%).
3. Per-agent TD-error statistics (mean, variance, per-agent breakdown).
4. Current reward shaping weights.
5. An episodic memory buffer of the last 3 interventions and their resulting TD-error deltas.
The prompt explicitly instructs the LLM to output unnormalized log-probabilities (logits), rather
than final strict weights:
“Your output values represent unnormalized log-probabilities (logits). They will be processed
via a temperature-scaled softmax function and scaled to maintain a constant total reward
budget. Focus on the RELATIVE MAGNITUDE and PRIORITY RANKING of subtasks.”

This design leverages the synergy between reasoning and acting (Yao et al., 2023). It intentionally
decouples the LLM from absolute mathematical calibration, allowing it to act purely as a metasupervisor (Sun et al., 2024). The Commander is free to express priority differences via wide
"feelings" of importance (e.g., scoring a critical bottleneck at 8.0 and a completed task at 0.5),
knowing the downstream math will safely normalize this into a stable reward budget.
Although the planner ultimately selects a single target goal (eq. (12)), outputting these continuous
logit values is essential for mathematical stability. If we forced the LLM to output binary 0/1
weights, the planner would instantly snap to a new goal like flipping a light switch. This violent
shift would disrupt the Critic’s value predictions and risk catastrophic forgetting. By using
continuous logits, the system can blend the weights over time, transitioning the agents smoothly
toward the new objective.
The LLM responds with a standardized JSON object containing its reasoning and the raw logits
for each subtask:
{
"reasoning": "<1-2 sentences>",
"w_wood":
<float, logit>,
"w_stone":
<float, logit>,
"w_workbench": <float, logit>,
"w_iron":
<float, logit>,
"w_bridge":
<float, logit>,
"w_enemy":
<float, logit>,
"w_gold":
<float, logit>
}

5.5

Softmax Attention Budget

When the Commander responds to the SOS flare, the raw logits c = (c1 , . . . , cK ) it returns
are unconstrained real numbers (e.g., they can be wildly positive or negative). If we applied

these raw values directly to the reward function, the Commander could accidentally inflate or
deflate the entire "economy" of the grid-world, completely destabilizing the PPO Critic’s value
estimations.
To prevent this, the raw logits are converted into a budget-preserving weight vector via a
temperature-scaled softmax, analogous to Boltzmann action selection (Sutton_Barto_2018):
wi = K ·

exp ci /τ
K
X



exp cj /τ

(19)


j=1

where K = |W| = 7 is the number of subtask weights and τ = 0.5 is the temperature hyperparameter. This operation enforces the following properties:
• Constant budget: K
i=1 wi = K always. The total amount of priority distributed among the
tasks remains perfectly constant, ensuring the overall reward magnitude is invariant to the
LLM’s output scale.
• Sharpening via temperature: The exponentiation (ex ) forces the unconstrained logits
into strictly positive values, creating a probability budget. The temperature τ acts as a
"decisiveness" dial. As τ → ∞, the weights become perfectly uniform (ignoring the LLM).
As τ → 0, the entire budget concentrates on the top choice, creating harsh transitions. A
temperature of τ = 0.5 amplifies the Commander’s priority differences while maintaining a
continuous landscape suitable for time-smoothing.
• Numerical stability : To prevent overflow errors during exponentiation, the implementation
shifts the logits by subtracting the maximum value before applying the softmax.
P

5.5.1

EMA Smoothing

As noted in Section 5.2, sudden transitions in target goals cause severe whiplash for the PPO
algorithms. To ensure the active target shifts smoothly rather than snapping instantly, the softmax
output is blended with the previously active weights via an Exponential Moving Average (EMA):
(t)

ei
w

(t−1)

ei
= α · wisoftmax + (1 − α) · w

(20)

with α = 0.2. This mechanism acts as a shock absorber. It ensures that each new directive from
the Commander takes roughly ⌈1/α⌉ = 5 updates to fully propagate into the environment, giving
the agents time to adjust their trajectories.

5.5.2

Safety Bounds and Auto-Rollback

While the softmax budget normalizes the outputs, the system employs two final safety nets to
enforce principles of Safe Reinforcement Learning and protect the workers from malformed LLM
directives, a well-documented vulnerability often leading to reward hacking (Amodei et al., 2016).
First, before softmax normalization, individual logits are clipped to a maximum of wmax = 3.0,
and the raw sum is bounded to Wbound = 15.0. This prevents a hallucinated, extreme LLM logit
from bypassing the temperature smoothing.

Second, the RewardInjector monitors the average environment reward for 25 updates following
any LLM intervention. If this post-intervention average drops more than 20% below the preintervention level, it triggers an Auto-Rollback :
rollback ⇐⇒

r̄pre − r̄post
> 0.20
|r̄pre |

(21)

Fundamental policy optimization algorithms, including PPO, are designed around the mathematical desire for monotonic improvement, guaranteeing that a new policy performs at least as well
as the old one (Schulman et al., 2017). Because the LLM injects external, non-stationary shocks
into the reward landscape, mathematical guarantees of monotonic improvement are temporarily
broken. This Auto-Rollback acts as an empirical failsafe, instantly reverting the weights to restore
training stability if the Commander’s new strategy proves disastrous on the ground.

5.6

Potential-Based Reward Shaping
(i)

Once the planner evaluates the smoothed weights and assigns an active goal zone gt to
agent i, the environment must translate that goal into a physical force. This is achieved via the
potential-based reward shaping (PBRS) framework established in Section 2.4.1.

5.6.1

The Magnetic Pull (Potential Function)

The potential of agent i in state s with respect to its assigned goal zone g is calculated geometrically:
Φ(i) (s, g) = Dmax − ∥p(i) (s) − zg ∥2
(22)
where p(i) (s) ∈ R2 is the agent’s (x, y) position, zg ∈ R2 is the target zone’s position, and
Dmax = 85 is the maximum diagonal distance of the grid. This potential is a strict measure of
proximity: it is high when the agent is physically close to the goal and low when it is far away.

Figure 15: Visualizing the Potential Function Φ as a gravity well on the spatial grid. As the
Euclidean distance to the active target decreases, the scalar potential strictly increases. This
creates a stable "magnetic pull" (the gradient) that safely guides the agent toward the Commander’s chosen objective.

Target Zone zg
Φ = 40

Magnetic
Pull

Φ = 55

Φ = 70

∥p(i) (s) − zg ∥2

Agent p(i) (s)

5.6.2

Applying the Shaping Reward

As the agent steps from state t to t + 1, the per-step shaping reward measures the difference in
this potential:

(i)
Ft = γ Φ(i) (st+1 , g) − Φ(i) (st , g) · λscale · 1[g active]
(23)
As established in Section 2.4.1, γ = 0.99 acts as the anti-farming mechanism, mathematically
punishing the agent if it loops backward along its own path.
The scale factor (λscale = 0.05) acts as a volume knob. If an agent runs a long distance across
the map, its potential Φ might jump by +20 points. If unscaled, the agent would receive +20
simply for running, making marathon sprinting more lucrative than actually mining Gold (which
only yields a true sparse reward of +15). Multiplying by 0.05 shrinks that +20 movement reward
down to a +1.0 nudge. This guarantees the dense shaping reward remains a gentle guide, while
the sparse environmental milestones remain the ultimate, most profitable prize.
Additionally, the indicator 1[g active] acts as a mask. If the agent completes its portion of the
DAG and is idling while waiting for its partner, this mask zeroes out the shaping reward entirely,
preventing the agent from being incorrectly penalized for remaining stationary.
To execute this equation simultaneously across 128 parallel environments without crushing
the CPU, the shaping logic relies entirely on vectorized NumPy tensor operations, bypassing
standard Python loops.

5.6.3

Design Decision: Isolating Strategy from Force

You might notice that the LLM’s priority weights wj do not appear anywhere in Equation 19. This
is an intentional, critical design decision. The shaping signal F is not multiplied by the LLM’s
weights.
The Commander’s influence is encapsulated entirely within the goal selection variable g (eq. (12)).
The LLM dictates which direction the magnetic pull originates from, but it does not change the
strength of that pull. If F were dynamically scaled by the shifting LLM weights wj , the underlying
physical laws of the grid-world would constantly change, creating massive non-stationarity that
would crash the PPO Critic. By isolating the strategy (the target g) from the force (the stable,
policy-invariant gradient F ), the agents can learn to navigate safely.

5.6.4

Mathematical Impact on the MAPPO Objective

In this Mixing Board implementation, the LLM does not alter the Actor network’s state observations. The agents remain completely blind to the fact that they are being guided by an LLM; their
policy remains strictly πθ (at |st ).
(i)

Instead, the LLM alters the environment’s reward signal rt by injecting the shaping reward Ft
(scaled by a time-varying decay factor λt ):
total,(i)

rt

(i)

= rtenv + λt Ft

(24)

This augmented reward is fed directly into the MAPPO Advantage calculation:
(i)

total,(i)

At = rt

+ γVϕ (st+1 ) − Vϕ (st )

(25)

As a result, the Centralized Critic network Vϕ (st ) adjusts its value estimations to predict this
newly dense, goal-oriented reward landscape. The Actor simply follows the updated Advantage
(i)
gradient At . The LLM acts strictly as an invisible architect, magnetically pulling the MAPPO
policy toward specific regions of the state space without interfering with the neural network’s
architecture.

5.6.5

Shaping Decay

To ensure the agents eventually learn to act independently, the blending coefficient λt (Shaping
Decay) from Equation 20 forces the shaping signal to fade out over time. The decay λt begins
at 1.0 and anneals linearly to 0.01 over 500 updates, but only after the agents achieve a 40%
success rate on the critical "Bridge" bottleneck. This schedule ensures the agents have dense
"training wheels" early in the learning process, and gracefully transitions them to the sparse
environment reality once they prove they understand the map’s topology.

5.7

Async Communication Architecture

In standard Markov Decision Processes, observation and action delays severely destabilize
training (Katsikopoulos et al., 2003). If the PPO workers (the lumberjack and miner) had to
pause and wait for the Commander’s radio transmission (LLM inference) every time an SOS
flare was fired, the simulation would bottleneck. Querying the LLM takes seconds due to network
latency and inference time. If executed on the main thread, the GPU would sit at 0% utilization,
completely halting the MAPPO training loop.
To resolve this, queries are dispatched through an asynchronous LLMBridge module, which
runs a background daemon worker thread. This asynchronous daemon approach mirrors recent
LLM-agent frameworks like GITM (Zhu et al., 2023), which explicitly decouple the environment
clock to accommodate LLM inference latency.
The asynchronous dataflow executes as follows:
1. Trigger: The Critic trigger fires at the end of a PPO update and constructs the prompt (the
situation report).
2. Dispatch: The prompt is enqueued to a thread-safe queue.Queue.
3. Background Processing: A daemon worker thread dequeues the prompt and calls the
LLM backend (Ollama HTTP API, HuggingFace local, or Gemini API) without interrupting
the main simulation.
4. Continuous Execution: While the LLM is "thinking," the RL loop continues gathering new
trajectories using the old priority weights.
5. Seamless Injection: On completion, the callback parses the JSON, passes it to the
RewardInjector, and stores it as “pending weights.” At the next training update, the
CriticTrigger.on_update_end detects the pending weights, applies the EMA smoothing,
and updates the magnetic pull for the next rollout.
This design guarantees that the high-frequency PPO update is never blocked by network latency.
This delay does not destabilize the agents because the Commander is only shifting the macrostrategy (the reward gravity), rather than controlling their direct micro-actions. The LLM bridge
also maintains a thread-safe response cache to avoid redundant queries for identical prompts,
and utilizes an exponential backoff retry logic (2k seconds for attempt k, up to 3 retries) to handle
API timeouts safely.

5.8

Summary

The Mixing Board approach successfully treats the LLM as a meta-level Commander that
reads aggregate training statistics and outputs strategic priority logits. By routing these priorities
through a cascade of safety layers (DAG guardrails, clipping, softmax budget normalization, EMA
smoothing, and auto-rollback), the system ensures that the LLM’s influence remains bounded
and mathematically stable. Finally, the Potential-Based Reward Shaping (PBRS) framework
guarantees that this strategic influence acts as a policy-invariant magnetic pull, guiding the
workers out of exploration bottlenecks without corrupting the foundational reinforcement learning
mechanics.

Table 2: Key hyperparameters of the Mixing Board approach.
Component

Parameter

Value

Softmax budget

Temperature τ
Budget size K
α
wmax (per-weight clip)
Wbound (sum clip)
Plateau window W
Plateau threshold ϵ
Z-score σbase
Cooldown
Sensitivity decay
Window
Drop threshold
Scale λscale
Dmax
λinit
λfinal
Decay trigger
Decay duration

0.5
7
0.2
3.0
15.0
10
0.02
1.5
25 updates
0.995
25 updates
20%
0.05
85.0
1.0
0.01
bridge > 40%
500 updates

EMA smoothing
Safety bounds
Critic trigger

Auto-rollback
PBRS
Shaping decay

6

The Meta-Controller: Discrete Neuro-Symbolic HRL

The previous section established the Mixing Board architecture, representing a "soft integration"
of Large Language Models into MARL. In that paradigm, the LLM acted as an environmental
architect, manipulating the gravitational pull of potential-based rewards to gently guide the
agents toward logical milestones. While this elegant separation preserves the underlying Markov
properties, it restricts the LLM to an indirect role: it can only suggest a direction, not enforce a
strategy.
To fully explore the spectrum of neuro-symbolic integration, we must ask: what happens when
we grant the LLM direct semantic authority over the agents’ cognitive state?
This section details the second integration strategy: a Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning
(HRL) framework. Here, we transition from soft environmental guidance to hard architectural
integration. The LLM ceases to be a distant architect and becomes a direct Meta-Controller.
Instead of adjusting continuous weights over a fixed greedy planner, the Meta-Controller replaces
the planner entirely. It selects discrete high-level Options (macro-actions) that strictly govern the
behavior of the low-level MAPPO policy.
In our established metaphor, the Commander is no longer just shifting the gravity; it is radioing
explicit, non-negotiable orders directly into the sensory inputs of the lumberjack and miner.
The exposition follows the implementation order:
1. Option Definitions (section 6.2): Defining the discrete macro-actions available to the
Commander.
2. Discrete Option Selection (section 6.3): How the LLM is triggered to assign these explicit
tasks.
3. One-Hot Observation Augmentation (section 6.4): How the Commander’s text-based
orders are mathematically injected into the MAPPO neural network.
4. Bipartite Reward Structure (section 6.5): The dual-reward system required to train the
workers to follow these new explicit orders.
5. Staleness and Counterfactual Reflection (section 6.7): How the Commander diagnoses
its own mistakes when an order fails on the ground.

6.1

System Overview

Figure 16 illustrates this two-level command architecture. The Meta-Controller (LLM) observes
inventory transitions and assigns explicit Options to each agent asynchronously. Unlike the
dynamic approach where the MAPPO policy remained blind to the LLM’s existence, here, the
low-level MAPPO policy receives the active option directly as part of its mathematical observation
space. This creates a true, tightly coupled two-level decision hierarchy.

Figure 16: Two-level HRL architecture. The LLM Meta-Controller is triggered by option success
or staleness (dashed). The OptionController passes one-hot embeddings to the MAPPO agent
at every step (solid), directly altering the agent’s cognitive state.
LLM
Meta-Controller

JSON

OptionController
(0) (1)
ot , ot
one-hot eo

success / stale
terminal

Env Step
st → st+1

rtenv + rtintr

MAPPO Agent
πθ (a | s, o)

at

6.2

Option Definitions

In the dynamic shaping approach, the LLM merely influenced a hard-coded planner. In this
Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (HRL) architecture, the LLM completely replaces the
planner. It selects from a finite set of explicit macro-actions, or Options, and directly commands
the low-level MAPPO agents.
An Option o ∈ O is mathematically defined by the triple ⟨Io , πo , βo ⟩: an initiation set, an intraoption policy, and a termination condition (Sutton; Precup, et al., 1999). In our framework, the
option set O is derived directly from the dependency DAG, providing 10 discrete macro-actions
as detailed in Table 2.
Table 3: Option properties: target zone, responsible agent, and initiation condition.
Option
COLLECT_WOOD
COLLECT_STONE
CRAFT_PICKAXE
MINE_IRON
CRAFT_SWORD
CRAFT_ARMOR
BUILD_BRIDGE
FIGHT_ENEMY
COLLECT_GOLD
IDLE

Zone

Agent

Initiation Condition

Wood (0)
Stone (1)
Workbench (2)
Iron (3)
Workbench (2)
Workbench (2)
Bridge (4)
Enemy (5)
Gold (6)
—

0
1
Both
1
Both
Both
Both
Both
1
Both

Always
Always
wood ≥ 1, stone ≥ 1, pickaxe < 1
pickaxe ≥ 1
iron ≥ 1, sword < 1
iron ≥ 1, armor < 1
wood ≥ 1, bridge < 1
bridge, sword, armor ≥ 1
enemy defeated, gold < 1
Always

Rather than building 10 separate neural networks, the intra-option policy πo is executed by the
single, shared MAPPO network, which conditions its kinetic movements based on the active
option (detailed in Section 6.4).
The termination condition (βo ) is not based on spatial coordinates, but on semantic success. For
example, if the Commander radios the COLLECT_WOOD Option to the lumberjack, that Option only
terminates when the system registers an increase in the wood inventory.

6.3

Discrete Option Selection by the LLM

Because the Meta-Controller issues explicit, discrete commands, it does not need to continuously
monitor the mathematical variance of the Critic network (unlike the Mixing Board approach).
Instead, the Commander acts reactively, stepping in only when a worker completes a task or
fails to make progress.

6.3.1

Trigger Conditions: Success and Staleness

Option selection is triggered dynamically under two specific conditions, evaluated per-environment:
1. Success: The agent successfully acquired the item (the inventory slot changed), meaning
the current Option has terminated and the agent awaits a new order.
2. Staleness: The active option has been running for more than Tstale = 150 steps without
completion. In MARL, a step t → t+1 represents a physical movement or action in the grid.
If an agent executes 150 low-level kinetic actions without satisfying its macro-objective,
the system assumes the agent is stuck (e.g., trying to mine iron without a pickaxe) and
forces an LLM intervention.
Environments that are already awaiting an LLM response (llm_pending) or are on a brief 50-step
cooldown are safely excluded from triggering new queries.

6.3.2

Prompt Structure and Counterfactual Reflection

When a trigger fires, the PromptBuilder translates the grid-world’s Python inventory state into a
text-based JSON schema. For a standard Success trigger, the Commander receives a Chain-ofThought prompt detailing the current inventory and the DAG dependencies, requesting exactly
one discrete Option per agent:
You are the high-level Cognitive Orchestrator for two MARL agents.
Strict Dependency DAG: (Wood+Stone) -> Pickaxe -> Iron
-> (Sword+Armor) -> Bridge -> Enemy -> Gold.
### CURRENT STATE:
Inventory: {inventory}
Agent 0 Status: {a0_status}
Agent 1 Status: {a1_status}
### YOUR TASK:
Assign exactly ONE discrete Option to each agent.
Available Options: ["COLLECT_WOOD", "COLLECT_STONE", "CRAFT_PICKAXE",
"MINE_IRON", "CRAFT_SWORD", "CRAFT_ARMOR", "BUILD_BRIDGE",
"FIGHT_ENEMY", "COLLECT_GOLD", "IDLE"]
Respond ONLY with valid JSON:
{
"dag_check": "<1 sentence reasoning>",
"agent_0_option": "<Option>",
"agent_1_option": "<Option>"

}
However, if a Staleness trigger fires, the LLM receives a counterfactual reflection prompt. Rather
than simply asking for a new assignment, this prompt forces the LLM to diagnose why its
previous assignment failed before issuing new options:
### REFLECTION REQUIRED:
Agent 0 was assigned "{a0_option}" and Agent 1 was assigned "{a1_option}".
After {stale_steps} steps, NEITHER has succeeded.
### YOUR TASK:
1. First, diagnose what prerequisite is MISSING.
2. Then assign corrected options that respect the DAG.
Respond ONLY with JSON:
{
"reflection": "<diagnosis>",
"dag_check": "<verification>",
"agent_0_option": "<Option>",
"agent_1_option": "<Option>"
}

6.3.3

Batched Queries with Deduplication

Training MARL requires running 128 parallel copies of the grid-world simultaneously. If 40
parallel environments all trigger the LLM at the same time because the lumberjack just collected
wood, querying the Commander 40 separate times for the exact same inventory state would
waste massive computational resources.
To optimize throughput, the system employs a deduplication mechanism. It groups the parallel
environments by their unique inventory vectors, sends only one prompt per unique state to the
LLM, and broadcasts the single response back to all environments sharing that exact state.

6.3.4

Environment Freezing During Pending Queries

A critical challenge in asynchronous LLM-agent frameworks is state drift (latency-induced
non-stationarity) (Katsikopoulos et al., 2003). Querying the Commander takes several seconds.
If the RL environment continues to run while awaiting the radio transmission, the lumberjack
would execute random or stale actions. By the time the Commander’s new Option arrives, the
agent might have wandered to the opposite side of the map, rendering the LLM’s decision
irrelevant to the new physical reality. This problem is well-documented in LLM-agent systems:
for instance, Ghost in the Minecraft (Zhu et al., 2023) relies on pausing the simulation while the
LLM reasons about its next action.
To prevent this drift, any environment awaiting an LLM response is physically frozen.
This ensures that the Commander’s decision is applied to the exact physical state it observed,
maintaining strict temporal alignment between strategy and execution.

6.4

One-Hot Observation Augmentation

Once the Commander has selected a discrete Option, that command must be physically
transmitted to the worker. In the MAPPO framework, this is achieved by appending a one-hot
vector directly into the agent’s localized observation space, effectively acting as a “radio receiver”
for the Commander’s orders.

6.4.1

Dynamic Enemy State

Unlike the Mixing Board approach, which used the base BatchCraftingEnvV2 environment, the
HRL architecture operates on a custom extended environment (HRLCraftingEnv) that introduces
a dynamic enemy. In this variant, the enemy is no longer a static zone interaction. Instead, the
enemy tracks the agents’ positions and actively chases any agent that crosses the river, creating
a real-time pursuit challenge. The combat system rewards coordination: if both agents attack the
enemy simultaneously, they deal 50 HP of damage per step, compared to only 10 HP for a solo
attack. This 5× coordination multiplier makes the FIGHT_ENEMY option inherently cooperative.
To give the agents spatial awareness of this dynamic threat, the three dimensions that were
occupied by the goal embedding in the Mixing Board approach (indices 2–4) are repurposed to
carry the enemy’s real-time state: its (x, y) position and its normalized health h/100.

6.4.2

Observation Construction

The vector input to the MAPPO network in this HRL mode is expanded to 25 dimensions:

(i)





|{z}

vt =  p(i)
R2

enemy
d
| {z }
R3

x
|{z}

R10 (inv)

eo(i)

t
|{z}



 ∈ R25


(26)

R10 (one-hot)

where p(i) is the agent’s spatial position, denemy = (xenemy , yenemy , henemy /100) is the dynamic
enemy state vector, x is the shared inventory vector, and eo ∈ {0, 1}10 is the one-hot encoding
of the active option.
This design maintains the same R25 dimensionality as the Mixing Board approach, allowing the
identical neural network architecture to be used across both experiments. The three dimensions
previously occupied by the continuous goal embedding are simply repurposed to carry the
enemy state, preventing any architecture mismatch when loading or comparing models between
the two approaches.

6.4.3

One-Hot State Augmentation vs. Dense Embeddings

There is a fundamental mathematical distinction in representation learning between a sparse
one-hot encoding and a dense continuous embedding. The OptionController maintains perenvironment, per-agent option indices and produces a categorical one-hot representation via
vectorised indexing.

In deep reinforcement learning, appending a one-hot vector eo to the agent’s physical observation
state st effectively acts as an index lookup. When the augmented state s′t = [st ∥ eo ] is passed
through the first linear layer of the MAPPO network, the matrix multiplication mathematically
isolates a specific set of weights corresponding to the active option.
This mechanism allows the single MAPPO network to learn option-conditional behaviour. We
do not need to train 10 separate policy networks for 10 separate options; the singular policy
πθ (a | s, o) dynamically specializes its internal activations based on which one-hot "switch" the
Commander has flipped.

6.5

Bipartite Reward Structure

In standard RL, the environment reward is the ground truth. However, in our sparse environment,
relying solely on this is analogous to a university student only receiving feedback on graduation
day (the diploma). To ensure the agents learn the day-to-day behaviors required to achieve that
diploma, the HRL approach uses a bipartite (two-part) composite reward: a sparse environment
reward and a dense intrinsic reward.

6.5.1

Environment Reward (Sparse)

The environment reward rtenv is the true, unmodified signal from the environment. It consists of a
constant time-step penalty of −0.01 to encourage speed, plus massive milestone bonuses upon
successfully completing a physical subtask:
Table 4: Environment reward structure from crafting_env.py.
Event
Step penalty
Collect Wood
Collect Stone
Craft Pickaxe
Mine Iron
Craft Sword/Armor
Build Bridge
Defeat Enemy
Mine Gold (win)

6.5.2

Reward (shared)
−0.01
+2.0
+2.0
+3.0
+2.0
+3.0
+3.0
+10.0
+15.0

Intrinsic Reward (Dense)

The intrinsic (shaping) reward is a synthetic “breadcrumb trail” generated internally by the
architecture to keep the agent motivated toward the Commander’s assigned target. It consists of
two sub-components: a continuous distance-based shaping mechanism, and a discrete option
success bonus.
First, the continuous distance-based shaping reward toward the active option’s target zone is

computed identically to the PBRS framework (Ng et al., 1999) established in Section 2.4.1, but
applied to the option’s target rather than the planner’s target:
shape,(i)

rt

= 1{o(i) ̸=IDLE} · λintr γ Φ(i) (st+1 , zo ) − Φ(i) (st , zo )



(27)

where zo is the target zone of option o (table 2), Φ is the potential function, and λintr = 0.05.
This formulation is mathematically constructed to guarantee policy invariance while ensuring
multi-agent coordination stability. The canonical difference form γ Φ(st+1 ) − Φ(st ) prevents the
agent from exploiting the dense reward signal. Without the discount factor γ, an agent could
theoretically accumulate infinite positive reward by stepping back and forth between two adjacent
states. By decaying the future potential, any such cycle yields a net negative shaping reward (Ng
et al., 1999).
The indicator function 1{o(i) ̸=IDLE} serves as a key coordination mask. In cooperative tasks,
an agent assigned the IDLE option is intentionally waiting for its partner to satisfy a DAG
dependency. If shaping rewards were applied during this state, the agent’s policy gradient would
be erroneously penalized for remaining stationary. The mask zeroes out the shaping gradient
entirely, ensuring the agent learns to safely wait without introducing non-stationary noise into
the value network.
Second, when an agent completes its active option (the relevant inventory slot increases), the
distance shaping is overridden, and it receives a flat intrinsic success bonus of +1.0:


1.0

intr,(i)
rt
=

r shape,(i) (eq. (23))
t

if option o(i) terminated successfully

(28)

otherwise

Success is detected by comparing the inventory before and after the environment step.

6.5.3

Composite Reward

The total reward signal fed to the PPO algorithm is a weighted sum of the environment diploma
and the intrinsic breadcrumbs:
rttotal = rtenv + αintr · rtintr

(29)

with αintr = 0.5. This coefficient was chosen to balance the dense intrinsic signal against the
sparse environment milestones; too large a value causes the policy to over-optimise for intrinsic
shaping at the expense of actual task completion.
Note the key difference from the Mixing Board approach: here, no λ decay schedule is applied.
The intrinsic coefficient remains fixed because the LLM continuously updates the direction (which
option to pursue) rather than the magnitude of shaping.

6.6

Mathematical Impact on the MAPPO Objective

Unlike the Dynamic approach, which acted purely as an environment architect through the
reward signal, the Meta-Controller strikes the MAPPO equations in two places simultaneously :
the observation space (Actor) and the reward space (Critic).
On the Actor side, the one-hot option conditioning transforms the decentralized policy of agent i
(i) (i)
(i) (i) (i)
from πθ (at |st ) into an option-conditional distribution πθ (at |st , ot ). The Actor’s goal in PPO
is to maximize the probability of good actions, but it uses a “clipped objective” to ensure the
network does not update its weights too aggressively in a single step. By injecting the discrete
(i)
(i)
option ot , the probability ratio rt (θ) between the new and old policy becomes option-aware:
(i)

rt (θ) =

(i)

(i)

(i)

(i)

(i)

(i)

πθ (at |st , ot )

(30)

πθold (at |st , ot )

and the clipped surrogate objective updates accordingly:
h



(i)

(i)

 (i) i

(i)

LCLIP (θ) = E min rt (θ)At , clip rt (θ), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ At

(31)

(i)

On the Critic side, learning is driven by the Advantage function (At ). Advantage measures
how much better a chosen action was compared to the baseline expectation. This baseline is
provided by the Centralized Value function Vϕ . To maintain the CTDE paradigm established in
Section 2.2.2, the Critic evaluates the global environment state st . In this HRL architecture, it
(0)
(N )
also receives the joint options of all agents ot = (ot , . . . , ot ). The bipartite reward feeds into
this option-conditional Advantage:
(i)

total,(i)

At = rt

+ γVϕ (st+1 , ot+1 ) − Vϕ (st , ot )

(32)

Because the Value function Vϕ now receives the globally augmented state s′t = [st ∥ eot ], the
Critic learns to predict entirely different baseline expected returns depending on the combination
of options actively guiding the agents.
The consequence is a tightly coupled learning loop: the Actor gradient explicitly links the
(i)
(i)
local physical state st , the Commander’s specific order ot , and the intrinsic success of that
(i)
command through At . The network learns distinct sub-policies for each option, not through
separate networks, but through a single policy that conditions its behavior on which “switch” the
LLM has flipped.

6.7

Staleness Detection and Counterfactual Reflection

6.7.1

Staleness Detection

The OptionController acts as a watchdog, tracking the age (number of steps) of each active
option per environment. If an option exceeds Tstale = 150 steps without termination, the
environment is marked as stale and the Commander is re-queried.
The IDLE options are excluded from staleness triggers, because intentional waiting (e.g., the

lumberjack waiting while the miner collects stone) is a valid strategy.

6.7.2

Counterfactual Reflection

When a staleness trigger fires, the LLM receives a reflection prompt instead of the standard
assignment prompt. This forces the LLM to reason about why the previous option failed—typically
a missing DAG precondition—before proposing a corrected assignment.
This design addresses the observed failure mode where the LLM repeatedly assigned options
whose preconditions were not met (e.g., MINE_IRON without a pickaxe). The reflection mechanism
leverages the LLM’s zero-shot reasoning to debug its own prior hallucination. This synergizes
reasoning and acting, a paradigm demonstrated by ReAct (Yao et al., 2023), and extends it into
the realm of self-reflection and counterfactual critique (Shinn et al., 2023).

6.8

Episode Lifecycle and Option Reset

When an environment reaches a terminal state (gold mined, game over, or truncation at 800
steps), the OptionController hard-resets that environment to its initial options.
The initial options (COLLECT_WOOD for the lumberjack, COLLECT_STONE for the miner) correspond
to the first layer of the DAG, ensuring agents begin collecting resources immediately upon
episode start.

6.9

PPO Integration: Target KL Guard

The HRL training loop adds a target KL divergence early-stopping mechanism, a standard
stability guardrail in Proximal Policy Optimization (as detailed in Section 2.1.4) (Schulman et al.,
2017). During each PPO epoch, the approximate KL divergence between the old and new
policies is monitored:


approx
DKL
= E − log πθnew (a|s) + log πθold (a|s)
(33)
approx
If DKL
> 0.015, the remaining PPO epochs are aborted for that update.

This guard prevents destructive policy updates when the intrinsic reward signal changes abruptly
after an LLM option reassignment.

6.10

Comparison with the Mixing Board Approach
Table 5: Structural comparison of the two LLM integration strategies.

Aspect

Mixing Board (Soft Integration)

Meta-Controller (Hard Integration)

LLM output space
LLM controls
Trigger mechanism
Query granularity
Observation augmentation
Reward structure

Continuous logits ∈ R7
Subtask priority weights
Plateau + Z-score on TD error
Global (once per trigger)
None (blind to LLM)

Discrete options ∈ O2
Explicit per-agent macro-actions
Option success or staleness
Per-environment (batched)
One-hot option ∈ {0, 1}10

PBRS with λ decay

LLM query frequency
Safety mechanism

Low (plateau-triggered)
Softmax budget, EMA, rollback

Bipartite: sparse env + dense intrinsic (fixed α)
High (per-option completion)
DAG in prompt, reflection, env
freezing

6.11

QLoRA Fine-Tuning Pipeline

While Section 3.2 established the theoretical foundations of Quantized Low-Rank Adaptation,
this section details the complete practical pipeline used to produce the specialized Commander
adapter deployed throughout the HRL experiments evaluated in Chapter 7. As will be demonstrated, a surprisingly brief fine-tuning process on a modest synthetic dataset is sufficient to
dramatically improve the Meta-Controller’s decision quality.

6.11.1

Oracle Dataset Generation

While the training data was ultimately generated synthetically to ensure exhaustive coverage of
the environment’s crafting DAG, the foundational state distributions were originally seeded by
observations from early, successful exploratory RL trajectories. By grounding the generation
process in these empirically observed states, a deterministic oracle function was developed to
systematically enumerate all meaningful inventory combinations (wood, stone, pickaxe, iron,
sword, armor, bridge, enemy, gold) and apply hardcoded DAG logic to determine the optimal
(agent_0_option, agent_1_option) assignment for each state. This oracle encodes the
optimal policy: for example, “if no pickaxe and wood ≥ 1 and stone ≥ 1, then both agents should
CRAFT_PICKAXE.”
To ensure balanced training signal across all phases of the DAG progression, the raw states
are grouped into six progression phases (early collection, pickaxe crafting, iron mining, gear
crafting, bridge building, and endgame combat). Each phase is upsampled to contribute an
equal share of the final dataset, preventing the model from over-indexing on trivially simple
early-game states.
Two augmentation techniques are applied to improve generalization:
1. Stochastic Oracle Augmentation (SOA): Drawing inspiration from Input Dropout and

state perturbation techniques in robust RL (e.g., Domain Randomization), we introduce
SOA to prevent overfitting to perfect state representations. With a 10% probability, a
randomly selected inventory field is zeroed before querying the oracle. For example, if the
true state is [wood: 1, stone: 1, pickaxe: 0], SOA might perturb it to [wood: 0,
stone: 1, pickaxe: 0]. This teaches the model to produce reasonable, safe outputs
even when the prompt contains slightly degraded or inconsistent state information—a
common occurrence during live RL rollouts where discrete observations may briefly lag
behind true kinetic state transitions.
2. Reflection Augmentation (40% injection rate): A synthetic hallucinated failure is
prepended to the prompt: “You previously chose [Incorrect Option]. It failed after [N]
steps.” The model must then output the correct option despite this misleading prior. This
augmentation was an intentional design decision to teach the Commander to recover from
logical errors. However, as will be revealed in Section 7.3.4, this same training signal
inadvertently caused the model to develop a strong prior that any reported failure implies
a logical mistake, even when the failure was purely kinetic (e.g., the agent simply had not
walked far enough yet). This foreshadows the central “Reflection Contradiction” finding of
the experimental evaluation.
The final raw dataset contains 1,200 balanced examples spanning all DAG phases and agent
status combinations.

6.11.2

ChatML Formatting and Dataset Splits

The raw prompt and completion pairs are converted into Qwen’s native ChatML format (Yang
et al., 2025), structuring each example as a three-turn conversation (system, user, assistant).
The system message contains the Commander’s role description and DAG rules, the user
message provides the current inventory state (and, for reflection examples, the failure context),
and the assistant message contains the expected JSON output.
After a 90/10 train–validation split and a 2× training set duplication (to ensure sufficient gradient
updates given the small dataset), the final corpus comprises 2,160 training examples and 120
validation examples.

6.11.3

Training Configuration

Fine-tuning was performed on the local workstation’s NVIDIA RTX 5070 GPU (12GB VRAM), as
described in Section 4.4. The strict memory envelope forced several architectural compromises
documented in Table 5.

Table 6: QLoRA fine-tuning hyperparameters. Values marked with † were constrained by the
12GB VRAM budget.
Category

Parameter

Value

Base Model

Architecture
Source

Qwen 2.5 7B-Instruct
HuggingFace Hub (Wolf et al., 2020)

Quantization

Precision
Compute dtype
Double quantization

LoRA Adapter

Rank r
Scaling α
Dropout
Target modules

Training

Epochs
Batch size†
Gradient accumulation
Learning rate
Scheduler
Optimizer
Max sequence length†
Gradient checkpointing†

1
1
8 (eff. batch = 8)
2 × 10−4
Cosine with warmup (10%)
Paged AdamW 8-bit (Dettmers; Lewis, et al., 2022)
1,024 tokens
Enabled

Infrastructure

Library
Adapter library
Logging

HuggingFace TRL (Werra et al., 2020) (SFTTrainer)
PEFT v0.19.1 (Mangrulkar et al., 2022)
TensorBoard

4-bit NormalFloat (NF4)
bfloat16
Enabled
16
32
0.05
All 7 (q/k/v/o/gate/up/down)

A critical engineering detail is the use of a custom DataCollatorForCompletionOnlyLM. During
standard supervised fine-tuning, the causal language modeling loss is computed over all tokens
in the sequence, including the system prompt and user message. This wastes gradient signal
on tokens that the model should never generate at inference time. Our custom collator scans
each tokenized sequence for the ChatML response delimiter (<|im_start|>assistant\n) and
masks all preceding tokens by setting their labels to −100. As a result, the cross-entropy loss
is computed exclusively over the Commander’s actual decision output (the JSON response),
ensuring that every gradient update directly improves the quality of option selection rather than
memorizing prompt boilerplate.

6.11.4

Training Results and Adapter Deployment

The complete fine-tuning process converged in approximately 3.1 hours (1,910 steps) on the
RTX 5070. As shown in Figure 17, the training loss dropped rapidly from 1.605 to 0.165, with
the final evaluation metrics confirming near-perfect task acquisition:
• Evaluation loss: 0.0007
• Mean token accuracy: 99.98%

Figure 17: QLoRA adapter fine-tuning performance over 1,910 training steps. The training loss
(left axis) converges rapidly within the first 500 steps, while the mean token accuracy (right axis)
saturates near 100%.

The resulting LoRA adapter weighs only 154 MB, approximately 1% of the full 15 GB base model,
yet encodes the complete DAG reasoning and JSON formatting capabilities required by the
Meta-Controller. For deployment during RL training, the adapter is loaded via the PEFT library
and merged with the base model in memory, or alternatively converted to GGUF format and
served through the Ollama inference framework (Section 4.4). Both pathways produce inference
latencies compatible with the synchronous RL training loop, as quantified in Section 7.4.2. This
fine-tuned adapter serves as the Meta-Controller for all “QLoRA” HRL configurations evaluated
in Chapter 7.

6.12

Summary

The Meta-Controller approach creates a clean separation of concerns: the Commander reasons
about what to do (strategic option selection via one-hot augmentation), while the MAPPO policy
learns how to do it (low-level navigation and interaction). The one-hot conditioning allows a
single network to exhibit option-dependent behaviour, and the bipartite reward structure ensures
that the policy receives both a consistent dense gradient from intrinsic shaping and a grounding
signal from the true environment rewards.
This architecture also effectively acts as an automated curriculum generator (contrasting with
the manual Curriculum Learning discussed in Section 2.3). While traditional curriculum learning
requires a human engineer to laboriously design and schedule environments of increasing difficulty, our LLM Meta-Controller dynamically orchestrates a skill curriculum on the fly, seamlessly
guiding the agents from simple resource gathering to complex combat coordination within a
single, static environment.

Table 7: Key hyperparameters of the Meta-Controller approach.
Component

Parameter

Value

Options
Staleness
Cooldown
Intrinsic reward

|O|
Tstale
Post-query cooldown
Distance scale λintr
Success bonus
αintr
Dmax
KL threshold
One-hot dimension
Total vec_dim

10
150 steps
50 steps
0.05
+1.0
0.5
85.0
0.015
10
25

Composite reward
Target KL
Network

7

Empirical Results: Breaking the Exploration Bottleneck

This chapter presents the experimental setup, the environments used for evaluation, and the
results obtained. We specifically focus on validating the hypothesis that a Meta-Controller LLM
can effectively resolve exploration bottlenecks in a sparse Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
(MARL) environment through dynamic reward shaping, and subsequently, how Hierarchical
Reinforcement Learning (HRL) further improves these capabilities.

7.1

Experimental Setup

To rigorously evaluate the proposed architectures, we compare distinct configurations within our
multi-agent resource-gathering environment, structured into two parts.
For the Dynamic Reward Shaping experiments, we evaluate:
1. Sparse Baseline: A standard MAPPO implementation (Yu et al., 2022) relying purely on
sparse environmental rewards (+1 for completing milestones).
2. LLM Dynamic (Gemini 2.5 Flash Lite): The proposed “Mixing Board” architecture,
utilizing Google’s Gemini 2.5 Flash Lite model via API as the Commander to dynamically
shift potential-based reward weights.
3. LLM Dynamic (Local Qwen 2.5 7B): An equivalent dynamic architecture utilizing a
localized, smaller parameter model (Qwen 2.5 7B) to observe the efficacy of smaller,
self-hosted LLMs.
For the Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (HRL) experiments, we evaluate three configurations:
1. No-LoRA Base (Qwen 2.5 7B): The un-finetuned base model serving as the HRL MetaController (the Commander).
2. QLoRA with Reflection (Qwen 2.5 7B): A QLoRA fine-tuned model (as detailed in
Section 6.11, the Qwen 2.5 7B model was fine-tuned using a 4-bit NF4 quantization
pipeline on 1,200 synthetic oracle examples) with counterfactual reflection triggered on
option staleness.
3. QLoRA without Reflection (Qwen 2.5 7B): The same fine-tuned model, with the reflection
mechanism disabled.
All runs were executed with identical MAPPO hyperparameters (clipping ϵ = 0.2, GAE5 λ = 0.95,
γ = 0.99, across 128 parallel environments).

7.2

Part 1: Dynamic Reward Shaping

The key metric validating the LLM Dynamic architecture is the progression through the environment’s strict dependency Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG).
5

Generalized Advantage Estimation

Figure 18: Subtask Completion Rates: Comparison between the Sparse Baseline and the LLM
Dynamic models over 2000 training updates.

As shown in fig. 18, all three configurations conquer the early-game tasks (Wood, Stone) almost
immediately. The Pickaxe subtask follows shortly after, with the Baseline reaching it at step 1.1M
and Gemini at step 720K.

However, the Baseline completely collapses at the Iron bottleneck. Without any dynamic reward
shaping to guide exploration, the Baseline workers never discover how to consistently mine Iron
(0% final rate), resulting in a total failure to learn all downstream tasks (Sword, Armor, Bridge).
In contrast, both LLM-guided runs break through the Iron bottleneck, but at remarkably different
speeds. Qwen unlocks Iron at step 10M, subsequently discovering Sword and Armor at
essentially the same step (10.1M). This rapid cascade demonstrates the snowball effect: once
a critical bottleneck is broken, downstream tasks are unlocked quickly. Gemini 2.5 Flash Lite
unlocks Iron much later, at step 40.7M (approximately 4× slower than Qwen). However, once
unlocked, the same cascade occurs: Sword and Armor appear at step 41.3M.
Neither run achieved Enemy defeats (0% for all three configurations), indicating that the combat
subtask represents a qualitatively different challenge beyond reward gravity, likely requiring
specialised action coordination that the current shaping signal alone cannot provide.

7.2.1

LLM Interventions in Action

To understand exactly how the LLMs broke the bottleneck, we analyse the evolution of the
reward weights. The weights shown in fig. 19 are the post-softmax weights actually applied to
the potential-based shaping.

Figure 19: Evolution of the Dynamic Reward Weights (post-softmax, as applied to the PBRS
signal).

(a) Gemini 2.5 Flash Lite Meta-Controller (198 interventions)

(b) Local Qwen 2.5 7B Meta-Controller (20 interventions)

Figure 19 reveals strikingly different command strategies. Gemini’s strategy as a Commander is
characterised by broad amplification of the early-chain tasks. wwood and wstone rapidly climb and
stay high, while wiron remains near zero after the softmax (mean 0.01). This reveals a counterintuitive insight: despite the raw LLM outputs assigning wiron = 1.0, the softmax normalisation
compresses this into a negligible effective weight because the Commander simultaneously
assigns high values to wood, stone, and bridge.
Qwen’s strategy exhibits a focused suppression-and-amplification profile. After an initial
exploration phase, wwood and wstone are aggressively dropped, while wiron rises sharply to a
peak of 3.87 during the mid-training bottleneck. By zeroing out already-mastered tasks and
concentrating the magnetic pull entirely on the bottleneck, Qwen breaks through Iron 30M steps
earlier than Gemini.

7.2.2

Reward Analysis
Figure 20: Average Environment Reward (True Milestones Reached).

Figure 20 presents the true average environment reward. Both LLM Dynamic runs achieve
significantly higher returns than the Baseline, reaching an identical peak reward (≈0.076). This
suggests that once the bottleneck is broken, the final quality of the learned policy is comparable;
the difference lies purely in the sample efficiency driven by Qwen’s highly focused interventions.
However, a closer inspection of the training trajectories reveals a critical difference in policy
stability and retention. Around step 2.97 × 107 , the Qwen-guided workers exhibit a sharp drop
in performance, seemingly forgetting how to complete the Bridge subtask. This catastrophic
forgetting is reflected in a corresponding dip in Qwen’s average environment reward. Conversely,
the Gemini Commander demonstrates superior stability: once it teaches the workers to build a
Bridge, they retain this behavior. This retention culminates in a higher average reward spike for
Gemini around step 4.65 × 107 . These observations suggest that while Qwen’s aggressive, narrowly focused shaping breaks bottlenecks much faster, Gemini’s broader amplification strategy
(Figure 19) may foster a more robust, generalizable policy that is less susceptible to catastrophic
forgetting.

7.3

Part 2: Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning

While the dynamic shaping architecture successfully guided the lumberjack and miner past initial
bottlenecks (like Iron), it ultimately stalled at the combat phase (Enemy, Gold). Modifying the
continuous reward landscape was insufficient to teach the workers the discrete, long-horizon
macro-actions required for coordinated combat.
This limitation motivated the shift to a full Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (HRL) architecture, where the Commander does not merely shape the rewards, but explicitly radios
discrete Options (e.g., “Craft Sword”, “Defeat Enemy”) directly to the lower-level MAPPO policy.
Three configurations were evaluated over 2000 optimization updates (≈65.5M environment
steps each):

1. No-LoRA Base: The un-finetuned Qwen 2.5 7B model serving as Meta-Controller.
2. QLoRA (With Reflection): The QLoRA fine-tuned model with counterfactual reflection
logic, triggered when an assigned Option becomes stale (workers fail to complete it within
150 steps).
3. QLoRA (No Reflection): The identical fine-tuned model, but with the reflection trigger
suppressed. On staleness, the Commander re-evaluates the raw environment state without
injecting any prior failure context.

7.3.1

Subtask Progression: Solving the DAG

Table 7 presents the exact environment step at which each subtask was first completed across
the three configurations. Each one managed to complete the DAG at some point.
Table 8: First breakthrough step (millions of environment steps) for each subtask. Bold indicates
the fastest configuration per subtask.
Subtask

No-LoRA

QLoRA + Refl.

QLoRA – No Refl.

Wood
Stone
Pickaxe
Bridge
Iron
Sword
Armor
Enemy
Gold

0.16M
0.16M
13.50M
30.61M
16.61M
16.71M
16.78M
30.74M
32.31M

0.29M
0.29M
1.25M
2.03M
2.13M
2.29M
2.29M
2.49M
7.08M

0.26M
0.26M
0.72M
1.18M
3.01M
3.15M
3.15M
3.24M
6.29M

Several patterns emerge from Table 7. First, all three configurations solve the early-game tasks
(Wood, Stone) within the first 0.3M steps, with the No-LoRA base marginally faster due to
lower inference overhead. Second, the QLoRA models exhibit a dramatic advantage starting
at Pickaxe: both fine-tuned runs complete the mid-game milestones (Pickaxe through Armor)
approximately 8–14× faster than the base model. The No-LoRA run does not reach Pickaxe
until 13.5M steps, nearly 11× slower than QLoRA with Reflection (1.25M), demonstrating that
fine-tuning is essential for coherent option sequencing.
Third, the No-LoRA run exhibits a pronounced ordering anomaly : it completes Iron, Sword, and
Armor (∼16.7M) well before Bridge (30.6M). Since the bridge is a prerequisite for reaching the
enemy side of the river, these combat-preparatory milestones accumulate without immediate
use. The workers spend ∼14M steps fully equipped but unable to cross the river. Both QLoRA
runs, by contrast, follow the optimal DAG ordering (building the bridge before crafting combat
equipment), resulting in a tight cascade from Bridge to Enemy (<0.5M steps gap).
Finally, at the Gold milestone, QLoRA without Reflection is the fastest (6.29M), followed closely
by QLoRA with Reflection (7.08M). The No-LoRA base reaches Gold at 32.31M, 5.1× slower,
confirming that without fine-tuning, the Commander struggles to plan the late-game transition
from combat to resource extraction.

Figure 21: Subtask completion rates across all nine environment milestones for the three HRL
configurations. The dependency chain flows left-to-right, top-to-bottom.

(a) Wood

(b) Stone

(c) Pickaxe

(d) Iron

(e) Sword

(f) Armor

(g) Bridge

(h) Enemy

(i) Gold

Figure 21 reveals that all three configurations ultimately solve the complete DAG, reaching
100% completion on every subtask including Gold. This is a qualitative leap over the Dynamic
Shaping architecture (Part 1), which never reached Enemy or Gold. The key differentiator
between configurations is not whether they succeed, but how quickly : QLoRA with Reflection
reaches 100% on Gold by ∼10M steps, QLoRA without Reflection by ∼8M steps, while the
No-LoRA base requires ∼35M steps, consuming more than half the training budget before the
workers first collect Gold.
Interestingly, the QLoRA with Reflection run’s subtask curves exhibit a distinctive “staircase”
pattern (Figure 21, Bridge and Enemy panels): early plateaus near 0% are followed by abrupt
jumps to 100%. This indicates that the rapid option cycling caused by the reflection mechanism
prevents workers from making incremental progress; instead, the completion rate stays near
zero until the PPO policy forces a breakthrough, after which it saturates instantly. By contrast,
the QLoRA without Reflection run shows a much smoother, gradual learning ramp (taking
roughly 4× as many updates to transition from 0% to 90% on the Enemy subtask compared
to No-LoRA). This smooth monotonic ramp is evidence of deliberate, stable option sequencing
by the fine-tuned Meta-Controller. The No-LoRA base falls in between, showing delayed but
relatively fast transitions once it eventually stumbles upon the correct behavior.

7.3.2

Reward Trajectories

Figure 22: Average Extrinsic Reward across HRL configurations. All three runs converge to
comparable final rewards (∼0.326), but the QLoRA runs reach this level ∼3× faster than the
No-LoRA base.

The reward trajectories (Figure 22) quantify the sample efficiency gap. All three configurations
converge to nearly identical final rewards (No-LoRA: 0.326, QLoRA+Refl: 0.326, QLoRA–NoRefl:
0.327), with peak rewards clustered at ∼0.335. This convergence confirms that the underlying
PPO policy has sufficient capacity to master the environment regardless of the Meta-Controller
quality, given enough time. The practical difference is entirely one of sample efficiency.
Compared to the Dynamic Shaping architectures (Part 1), which plateaued at 0.076, the HRL
architecture achieves a 4.4× improvement in peak reward. The QLoRA runs reach their peak
reward plateau by ∼28M steps (No Reflection) and ∼37M steps (With Reflection), while the
No-LoRA base does not stabilize until ∼55M steps. This ∼2× sample efficiency gap between
the QLoRA runs is the first quantitative signal that the reflection mechanism, while not preventing
convergence, actively delays it.

7.3.3

Stabilizing Non-Stationary Objectives via KL-Divergence Guarding

In the HRL architecture, the transition between discrete macro-actions (Options) induces abrupt
shifts in the intrinsic reward landscape. From the perspective of the low-level PPO workers,
the objective function is highly non-stationary. To prevent catastrophic forgetting of previously
learned kinetic policies, we bound the surrogate objective update using a strict Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence guard.
During the optimization epochs, we continuously monitor the approximate KL divergence be-

tween the behavioral policy πθold and the updating policy πθ (Schulman et al., 2017):
"
approx
DKL
=E

− log

πθ (a|s, o)
πθold (a|s, o)

!#

(34)

approx
If DKL
exceeds the predefined trust region threshold (δ = 0.015, implemented as target_kl),
the gradient updates for the current batch are immediately aborted.

Figure 23: Maximum approximate KL divergence per update across the three HRL configurations.
The dashed red line marks the early-stopping threshold δ = 0.015.

Table 9: KL divergence statistics and policy stability metrics across HRL configurations.
Metric

No-LoRA

QLoRA + Refl.

QLoRA – No Refl.

Mean max DKL
Peak max DKL
KL early-stop triggers
Staleness resets (total)
LLM queries dispatched
Final TD error (last 100 updates)
Mean TD error (all updates)

0.0066
0.025
46 / 2,000
28,927
12,752
0.042
0.046

0.0082
0.117
234 / 2,000
88,711
12,791
0.024
0.060

0.0073
0.107
152 / 2,000
39,137
13,710
0.023
0.048

Figure 23 and Table 8 reveal a counter-intuitive relationship between KL instability and learning
dynamics. The QLoRA with Reflection run triggers the KL early-stopping guardrail 5.1× more
often than the No-LoRA base (234 vs. 46 triggers) and 1.5× more often than the No-Reflection
run (234 vs. 152). Both QLoRA runs exhibit large peak KL spikes (>0.1), indicating aggressive
policy shifts during option transitions. The No-LoRA base, by contrast, shows modest peak KL

(0.025) and infrequent triggers. Its policy shifts are small because the un-finetuned Commander
generates less decisive option switches.
These aggressive policy shifts and high KL guard triggers in the QLoRA with Reflection run also
directly manifest as increased fluctuations in its average extrinsic reward trajectory (Figure 22).
The constant disruption of the objective function prevents the PPO workers from smoothly
optimizing their kinetic behaviors.
The QLoRA with Reflection run accumulates 2.3× more staleness resets than the No-Reflection
run (88,711 vs. 39,137), despite dispatching nearly the same number of LLM queries (12,791 vs.
13,710). This means each reflection-triggered re-query produces an Option that fails faster —
the Commander actively generates worse plans when told its previous plan failed. The rapid
cycling of short-lived Options produces a high frequency of small policy shifts: each individual
shift is small enough to avoid the KL guardrail, but the cumulative effect prevents the Critic
from converging on a stable value estimate. We term this pattern death by a thousand cuts:
individually invisible perturbations that collectively devastate sample efficiency.
The No-Reflection run follows the opposite pattern: infrequent, large, guarded transitions. The
Commander commits to long-horizon Options and rarely switches. When it does (for example,
transitioning from CRAFT_SWORD to DEFEAT_ENEMY), the policy shift is dramatic (peak KL = 0.107,
or 7× the threshold). The guardrail catches these large transitions and aborts the gradient
update. Over subsequent updates, the policy absorbs the new objective gradually. This pattern
of rare but controlled disruptions produces the lowest mean TD error (0.048) among the three
runs.

7.3.4

The Paradox of Reflection

The staleness data (Table 8) provides the mechanistic explanation for the delay caused by
reflection. The With-Reflection run dispatches essentially the same number of LLM queries
as the other runs (∼12,800), yet accumulates 3.1× more staleness resets than the No-LoRA
base (88,711 vs. 28,927) and 2.3× more than the No-Reflection run (88,711 vs. 39,137). Each
reflection-triggered query thus produces a worse Option, an Option that expires faster and
triggers yet another staleness event.
The root cause lies in how the instruction-tuning dataset was constructed. During QLoRA
fine-tuning, the dataset synthetically injected counterfactual failures: the training prompt stated
“You previously chose [Incorrect Option]. It failed.” The model then learned to output the correct
Option. As a result, the Commander associated the reflection trigger with a strong prior: my
previous choice was logically wrong, and I must switch to a different option.
During inference, however, option staleness is frequently triggered not by a logical error by
the Commander, but by kinetic delays on the ground: the lumberjack navigating around the
river terrain, the miner queuing at resource nodes, or simply needing more steps to execute a
fundamentally correct plan. When the orchestrator fires the reflection prompt, the Commander,
conditioned by its training data, assumes it made a reasoning error. It abandons the correct
long-horizon option and switches to an alternative, derailing the workers’ execution.
To illustrate this transparency, consider a snapshot directly from the evaluation logs where the

workers have already defeated the Enemy and just need to collect the Gold. The Commander
correctly assigns COLLECT_GOLD, but when the workers take too long and trigger a staleness
reset, the LLM hallucinates a logical error and regresses to an unnecessary prerequisite:
Inventory: {..., ’pickaxe’: 1, ’sword’: 1, ’bridge’: 1, ’enemy’: 1, ’gold’: 0}
Previous Assignment: Agent 1 failed on COLLECT_GOLD
LLM Response:
{
"reflection": "Previous assignment of IDLE and COLLECT_GOLD failed because
agents lacked the necessary sub-tier items.",
"dag_check": "A0 waits (bridge done), A1 crafts armor.",
"agent_0_option": "IDLE",
"agent_1_option": "CRAFT_ARMOR"
}
Even though Armor is entirely irrelevant once the Enemy is defeated, the Commander doubts its
own correct logic because the reflection prompt implied it made a mistake.
We term this failure mode the Reflection Contradiction: the architecture inadvertently trained the
LLM to doubt its own correct logic. Disabling the reflection mechanism allows the Commander
to maintain stable plans. On re-query, it re-confirms its current Option rather than compulsively
switching.
Figure 24: Temporal Difference Error Variance. The With-Reflection configuration exhibits
persistent high variance during mid-training from contradictory option switches. Both QLoRA
runs converge to similar final TD errors (∼0.024), while the No-LoRA base settles higher at
0.042.

The downstream effect is quantified in the TD Error Variance (Figure 24). The With-Reflection
configuration maintains the highest mean TD error across the full training run (0.060), 25%
higher than the No-Reflection run (0.048) and 30% higher than the No-LoRA base (0.046). This
elevated TD error during mid-training reflects the Critic’s inability to track the rapidly switching
intrinsic reward landscape caused by reflection-induced option churn. By the final 100 updates,
both QLoRA runs converge to comparable TD errors (With Reflection: 0.024, No Reflection:
0.023), indicating that the Critic eventually stabilizes once the policy has saturated all subtasks
and option switching diminishes. The No-LoRA base, despite its lower mid-training variance,
settles at a higher final TD error (0.042). Its Critic struggles with the less structured option
transitions produced by the un-finetuned model.
Ultimately, all three HRL configurations solve the complete environment DAG, representing a
qualitative breakthrough over the Dynamic Shaping architecture. The key finding is that QLoRA
fine-tuning is essential for sample efficiency (5× faster to Gold than the base model), while
the reflection mechanism (despite its theoretical appeal) delays convergence by injecting
ungrounded self-doubt into the Meta-Controller’s reasoning. The KL-divergence guardrail proves
indispensable for absorbing the inherent non-stationarity of option transitions, but it cannot
protect against the high-frequency, sub-threshold perturbations generated by the reflection loop.

7.4

Part 3: Robustness and Semantic Adaptation

Having established that hard integration (HRL) outperforms soft integration (Dynamic Shaping) in
solving the complete dependency graph, we now return briefly to the Mixing Board architecture.
To fully validate the theoretical claims made in Section 5.5.1 regarding stability, we isolate two
critical variables of the soft integration approach: the numerical stability provided by temporal
smoothing, and the zero-shot semantic adaptation capabilities of the LLM Commander.

7.4.1

Ablation: The Necessity of EMA Smoothing

In Section 5.5.1, we posited that feeding raw, discrete priority logits directly into the potentialbased shaping function would induce severe non-stationarity. To empirically verify this, an
ablation run was conducted wherein the Exponential Moving Average (EMA) layer was disabled.
Figure 25: Comparison of training stability with and without EMA smoothing (α = 0.2). Disabling
smoothing induces a severe spike in Temporal Difference (TD) error variance (right).

Figure 26: Subtask completion rates for Iron (left) and Sword (right). The variance spike directly
correlates with suboptimal learning and temporary regressions in advanced subtasks.

As shown in Figure 25, removing the EMA filter results in a noticeable spike in TD-error variance.
The ablation itself was executed by passing a skip_ema=True flag to the LLMOrchestrator,
which bypassed the exponential smoothing step entirely.
The Critic network struggles to track a reward objective that shifts instantaneously. Figure 26
illustrates the behavioral consequence: the non-stationarity leads to suboptimal optimization,
causing the workers to exhibit slight regressions in their Iron and Sword completion rates
during the mid-stages of training. However, it is worth noting that the No-EMA workers do
eventually recover and climb back to a 100% success rate on these tasks. Thus, while the
workers can mathematically overcome the noise, this proves that the EMA smoothing equation
is highly helpful for bridging discrete LLM outputs with continuous RL gradients, enabling faster
convergence and preventing such regressions.
To quantify the optimization efficiency provided by the EMA filter, Table 9 details the number of
environment steps required to reliably learn (i.e., achieve a ≥ 90% success rate) the advanced
subtasks.
Table 10: Environment steps required to reach a 90% completion rate. Disabling the EMA
smoothing filter causes a severe learning slowdown across all tasks, culminating in an inability
to converge on the terminal tasks within the training envelope.
Subtask

With-EMA (Baseline)

No-EMA (Ablation)

Wood
Stone
Pickaxe
Bridge
Iron
Sword
Armor
Enemy
Gold

0.33M steps
0.82M steps
1.31M steps
2.06M steps
2.22M steps
2.52M steps
2.52M steps
3.01M steps
7.07M steps

2.36M steps (7.2× slower)
2.46M steps (3.0× slower)
6.88M steps (5.3× slower)
9.24M steps (4.5× slower)
21.00M steps (9.4× slower)
21.63M steps (8.6× slower)
21.63M steps (8.6× slower)
Failed to Converge
Failed to Converge

Figure 27: Maximum subtask completion rates achieved across all runs. Despite the early
variance spikes, No-EMA eventually masters all tasks identical to the baseline.

7.4.2

Computational, Financial, and Energy Overheads

A practical consideration when integrating LLMs tightly into the RL training loop is the wallclock time overhead. Because the meta-controller queries the LLM dynamically throughout
the episode, relying on external or cloud-based APIs introduces severe network latency and
rate-limiting bottlenecks.
Analyzing the total execution times for a complete 128-update training run reveals this stark
reality. The Standard HRL Baseline (which uses a traditional static meta-controller without LLM
queries) completed training in 8.30 hours. When deploying an external cloud model (Gemini 2.5
Flash-Lite) for the LLM Dynamic run, the training time ballooned to 12.27 hours—a roughly 48%
increase purely due to API latency, despite querying a highly optimized "lite" model. Using a
heavier state-of-the-art online model (such as GPT-4) was entirely infeasible for our full training
comparisons due to strict API rate limits and prohibitive latency over thousands of calls.
In contrast, our optimized LLM Dynamic (LoRA) implementation, running a locally fine-tuned
Qwen2.5-7B model, completed the identical training run in just 7.78 hours. By keeping inference
entirely local, batching requests, and avoiding network overhead, the LLM-guided approach
achieved execution speeds completely on par with (and in this instance, marginally faster than)
the standard HRL baseline. This proves that dynamic LLM orchestration is not just theoretically
advantageous, but computationally viable when deployed efficiently at the edge.
Beyond pure execution speed, the financial and energy footprints of these architectures are
critical factors for independent researchers. Relying on commercial online APIs for the metacontroller generates a staggering volume of requests; simulating 128 parallel environments over
millions of steps yields millions of input and output tokens per training run. Relying on paid
APIs for this volume of queries would render the approach financially prohibitive. Additionally,
reinforcement learning is highly hardware-intensive. A standard local workstation drawing
approximately 750W continuously over a 12.27-hour API-bound run—or a 13.5-hour unoptimized
local run—results in substantial electricity consumption, which becomes especially burdensome
when multiplied by dozens of iterations, failed experiments, and hyperparameter sweeps. In
regions with high energy costs such as Switzerland, the ability of the optimized local LoRA
implementation to slash training time down to 7.78 hours provides a compounded benefit: it
completely eliminates API token costs while simultaneously reducing the electrical footprint and

associated utility costs by nearly 40% per run.

7.4.3

Environment Shift: The Paradox of Semantic Over-Confidence

A fundamental critique of using LLMs in MARL is whether they rely on genuine semantic worldmodels or merely overfit to node names. To test this, the environment was silently modified
at Update 500: the ‘Workbench‘ zone was renamed to ‘Furnace‘ in the Commander’s prompt
space. A secondary control run replaced ‘Workbench‘ with a nonsense string, ‘Zylorg‘.
This shift was executed by dynamically injecting an alias mapping into the LLMOrchestrator
mid-training, forcing the Commander to output weights for the alias rather than the canonical
node name, which the orchestrator then reversed and fed to the PPO workers.
The initial hypothesis assumed the Commander would cleanly map "Furnace" to crafting success,
while failing on "Zylorg". However, empirical results revealed a counter-intuitive phenomenon:
semantic over-confidence induced severe reward hacking, while semantic ignorance
acted as a natural regularizer.
Figure 28: Subtask completion rates during semantic shifts. The ‘Furnace‘ shift traps workers
in a local optimum, halting ‘Iron‘ and ‘Sword‘ progression, while the ‘Zylorg‘ shift organically
recovers.

Figure 29: Maximum subtask completion rates for the Shift group. Furnace masters initial tasks
(Wood, Stone, Pickaxe) but completely fails advanced tasks requiring exploration (Iron, Sword).

As seen in Figures 28 and 29, the ‘Zylorg‘ control unexpectedly succeeded across almost all
subtasks, achieving near-parity with the baseline’s extrinsic reward. When the Commander

encountered "Zylorg", it lacked a semantic prior. As a result, it assigned it a balanced priority
weight alongside other nodes, focusing its reasoning on recognizable end-goals like enemies.
"reasoning": "Enemy defeat is the current bottleneck with no progress.",
"w_wood": 0.8,
"w_stone": 0.8,
"w_zylorg": 0.9,
"w_iron": 0.9,
"w_enemy": 1.2
Because w_zylorg was not artificially inflated, the MAPPO workers, driven by the baseline
extrinsic rewards for crafting a Sword, naturally explored the environment, discovered the ‘Zylorg‘
station was the required prerequisite, and solved the bottleneck via standard PPO exploration.
The Commander’s ignorance prevented it from interfering with the RL algorithm’s foundational
mechanics.
Conversely, the ‘Furnace‘ shift failed severely on advanced tasks (‘Iron‘, ‘Sword‘) due to reward
hacking. The Commander correctly deduced zero-shot that a Furnace serves an identical
semantic purpose to a crafting bench, as demonstrated in its reasoning logs:
"reasoning": "Agents are not crafting Pickaxe or Sword, indicating a
bottleneck at the Workbench.",
"w_furnace": 0.4,
"w_iron": 0.2
However, by mapping the Furnace to the crafting bottleneck, the Commander heavily skewed
the Potential-Based Reward Shaping (PBRS) landscape. The MAPPO workers successfully
crafted the Pickaxe (Figure 29), but subsequently discovered they could accumulate massive
intrinsic returns simply by navigating back to the Furnace and idling there. They optimized for
the dense shaping signal at the expense of the sparse extrinsic reward, halting all exploration for
‘Iron‘ and ‘Sword‘.
This finding highlights a key vulnerability in neuro-symbolic MARL architectures: while LLMs
possess exceptional zero-shot semantic mapping, coupling high-confidence oracle weights with
dense gradient shaping can inadvertently trap low-level workers in local optima.

8

Conclusion: The Future of Neuro-Symbolic Control

This thesis investigated the integration of Large Language Models (LLMs) with Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning (MARL) to overcome the severe exploration bottlenecks inherent in
sparse-reward environments. By structuring the environment as a strict Directed Acyclic Graph
(DAG) of dependencies, we evaluated two distinct neuro-symbolic architectures: continuous Dynamic Reward Shaping (the “Mixing Board” approach) and discrete Hierarchical Reinforcement
Learning (the “Meta-Controller” approach).
The results demonstrate that while LLMs possess exceptional zero-shot semantic planning
capabilities, acting as high-level Commanders for low-level kinetic workers, integrating them
introduces profound challenges regarding reward stationarity, semantic grounding, and temporal
alignment.

8.1

Review of Findings

Our first major realization was the successful implementation of a dynamic Potential-Based
Reward Shaping (PBRS) framework. We demonstrated that an LLM could actively monitor
MARL agents and shift priority weights to guide exploration, successfully unblocking mid-game
bottlenecks that a standard sparse-reward MAPPO baseline failed to solve. We proved the
mathematical necessity of Exponential Moving Average (EMA) smoothing; without it, discrete
jumps in the Commander’s weight assignments induced severe Temporal Difference (TD) error
variance, triggering catastrophic forgetting in the underlying PPO policies.
The transition to a Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (HRL) architecture represented our
most significant qualitative leap. By allowing the Commander to dictate discrete macro-actions
(Options) rather than merely adjusting the gravitational pull of rewards, the agents mastered the
entire environment DAG, reaching 100% completion on the final milestones. Through ablation,
we established that QLoRA fine-tuning is absolutely critical for sample efficiency, enabling the
agents to reach the final objective approximately 5.1× faster than an un-finetuned base model.
Despite these successes, our experiments revealed vulnerabilities in neuro-symbolic MARL
paradigms, highlighting a fundamental misalignment between an LLM’s semantic priors and
kinetic reality. We isolated two major failure modes:
1. We discovered that when an LLM possesses strong zero-shot knowledge of a concept
(such as mapping a "Furnace" to crafting), it confidently warps the shaping signal and
inadvertently traps the agents in a local optimum via reward hacking. Conversely, when
presented with nonsense strings ("Zylorg"), its semantic ignorance acted as a natural
regularizer, allowing the underlying PPO exploration mechanics to organically solve the
bottleneck.
2. Endowing the LLM with counterfactual reflection generated 2.3× more staleness resets
and actively delayed convergence. Because the LLM was fine-tuned on synthetic data
where timeouts implied logical failures, it learned to doubt its own correct reasoning when
faced with purely kinetic delays. This resulted in rapid, contradictory option switching that
destabilized the PPO Critic, proving that reactive self-debugging is highly detrimental if the

model cannot distinguish between a logical error and physical friction.
Finally, the computational overhead of running an LLM in the training loop remains a significant
limitation, severely bounding the scalability of this architecture for high-frequency control tasks
despite the use of quantized, localized models.

8.2

Prospective Vision and Recommendations

The findings of this thesis lay the groundwork for more robust neuro-symbolic architectures,
carrying direct implications for complex coordination problems such as robotic swarm control,
automated supply chain logistics, and advanced game AI. To realize this potential, future
research must fundamentally bridge the gap between semantic logic and temporal delays.
Rather than relying on simple text-based timeout triggers, Meta-Controllers should be equipped
with spatio-temporal memory or multimodal state representations. This would allow the Commander to visually or temporally differentiate between a fundamentally flawed plan and a correct
plan that merely requires the workers to spend more physical time navigating the grid.
Additionally, the stabilization of non-stationary objectives requires refinement. While our static
KL-divergence guardrail (δ = 0.015) successfully prevented catastrophic forgetting during option
transitions, implementing an adaptive trust region could further stabilize the PPO workers.
Scaling the KL threshold dynamically based on the LLM’s confidence or the specific Option type
offers a more nuanced defense against objective shifts.
Finally, the current architecture evaluates cooperative agents executing a shared Meta-Controller
policy. A highly prospective avenue for future work is the development of decentralized HRL,
where multiple LLMs act as adversarial or dynamically allied faction leaders managing subgroups of agents. Expanding into these complex diplomacy and resource-competition scenarios
would thoroughly test the boundaries of MARL and AI alignment.
This thesis demonstrates that while Large Language Models are profoundly powerful strategic
directors for MARL agents, they must not be treated as infallible oracles. The path forward lies in
designing architectures that safely balance the high-level semantic brilliance of language models
with the uncompromising, low-level kinetic realities of reinforcement learning.

